	Irina Soltanovna was born in Odessa, Russia, in 1916. She enjoyed studying French and graduated from Moscow University in 1937 with a diploma in French, her best subject.
	Irinaís first job was as a French translator with a publishing house in Moscow. Later she was transferred to work in the French department of the Moscow Radio Centre. After that she worked in the French section of the Soviet Comintern.
	After World War II, in 1945, the Russian leader, Stalin, decided to build up Soviet spy forces abroad. Because of her familiarity with French language and culture, Irina Soltanovna naturally was chosen to work in France. After undergoing Secret Service training, she attended the French-speaking division of the spy school at Stiepnaya. When she graduated, ready for espionage abroad, the forty-one-year-old Irina ñ looking much, much younger ñ went to France under the false name of Mademoiselle Germaine. As Mademoiselle Germaine, Irina was typically French in the way she talked and walked and thought and behaved. She was as French as a woman can be ñ for a Russian. 
      In Paris she adopted the cover of a French governess and took a job with a Belgian family living in France. This Belgian family turned out to be an excellent choice for her. The family entertained frequently. The father of the family was director of a steel concern, so their guests included French and other Western European industrialists, scientists, technologists, officers, and even members of the Corps Diplomatique. Mademoiselle Germaine was treated as a member of the family. Consequently, she was included in these social events, where she was able to pick up important scraps of secret information about vital industrial and political events.
	Eventually, the Belgian family moved from France back to their home in Brussels. Mademoiselle Germaine accompanied them. Within weeks she had two spy webs operating. Numerous agents and informers supplied her with blueprints, plans, military reports, and other documents.
 	Her second-in-command was a Belgian named Paul Veken. He was, to all appearances, a fanatically religious office clerk. To Mademoiselle Germaine, it seemed safe to meet Paul Veken, whenever necessary, in the park where she took her employerís children every day. Veken always drifted along to share her park bench. It looked to the casual observer like a servant-girl romance. 
      Yet she became too complacent about their meetings. It was clever of  Mademoiselle Germaine to bring sandwiches to offer to Veken ñ but not so clever of him to eat only one and pocket the others, which contained microfilms. Counter-intelligence agents noticed. They also noticed that Mademoiselle Germaine and the children did not eat all the pastries that Veken brought them. 
      Mademoiselle Germaine and Paul Veken were arrested one day and all the evidence needed for their conviction was found ñ in the pastries and sandwiches. So ended the espionage career of Irina Soltanovna, alias Mademoiselle Germaine.	

