	Mademoiselle Germaine was typically French in the way she talked and walked and thought and behaved. She was as ìFrenchî as a woman can be ñ for a Russian.
	She was born Irina Soltanovna in Odessa, Russia, in 1916. She graduated from Moscow University in 1937 with a diploma in French, her best subject.
	Irinaís first job was as a French translator with a publishing house in Moscow. Later she was transferred to work in the French department of the Moscow Radio Centre. After that she worked in the French section of the Soviet Comintern.
	After World War II, in 1945, the Russian leader, Stalin, decided to build up Soviet spy forces abroad. Irina Soltanovna, naturally, was chosen to work in France.
	After undergoing Secret Service training, she attended the French-speaking division of the spy school at Stiepnaya. When she graduated, ready for espionage abroad, the forty-one-year-old Irina ñ looking much, much younger ñ went to France as ìMademoiselle Germaine.î In Paris she adopted the ìcoverî of a French governess and took a job with the family of a Belgian who was the director of a steel concern.
	The Belgian family turned out to be an excellent choice for her. They entertained frequently, and she was treated as a member of the family. Their guests included French and other Western European industrialists, scientists, technologists, officers, and even members of the Corps Diplomatique. Mademoiselle Germaine was able to pick up important scraps of secret information about vital industrial and political events.
	When the family moved back to Brussels, Mademoiselle Germaine accompanied them. Within weeks she had two spy webs operating. Numerous agents and informers supplied her with blueprints, plans, military reports, and other documents.
 	Her second-in-command was a Belgian named Paul Veken. He was, to all appearances, a fanatically religious office clerk. It seemed safe to meet him whenever necessary. Yet she became too complacent about their meetings in the park where she took her employerís children every day. Veken always drifted along to share her park bench. It looked to the casual observer like a servant-girl romance. It was clever of her to bring sandwiches to offer to Veken ñ but not so clever of him to eat only one and pocket the others, which contained microfilms.
	Counter-intelligence agents noticed. They also noticed that Germaine and the children did not eat all the pastries that Veken brought them. She and Veken were arrested one day. 
	All the evidence needed for their conviction was found ñ in the pastries and sandwiches. So ended the espionage career of Irina Soltanovna, alias Mademoiselle Germaine. 

