An epic battle is being fought out across thousands of miles of empty ocean, with just two boats struggling to stop Japan's whaling expedition in the Antarctic. The trouble is that one belongs to Greenpeace and the other to Sea Shepherd, rival organizations that are as likely to fight each other as the whalers they are hunting down.

The nautical drama is being played out between seven ships deep in the wild, and normally extremely lonely, Southern Ocean on the edge of Antarctica. The Nisshin Maru, a large Japanese whaling factory ship, is steaming due south at 15 knots in heavy seas with a crew of 80 and with the carcasses of possibly 50 whales on board.

Two miles behind it, in full sight but not in radio contact, is the Esperanza, a Greenpeace vessel with a volunteer crew of 21 nationalities and a Dutch captain. The Esperanza is well equipped but it looks tiny beside the vast whaling vessel.

Steaming towards both ships is the MV Steve Irwin, the black-painted flagship of Captain Paul Watson and the California-based Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, the world's most uncompromising environmental enforcement group. His crew is smaller, but - like that of the Esperanza ? is made up of brilliant and committed seamen.

The MV Steve Irwin is roughly 2,500 miles south-west of Fremantle in Australia, pursuing a group of four small whaling ships that the Japanese are using to kill nearly 1,000 whales in the Antarctic whale sanctuary this year. This taskforce of four ships is thought to be heading towards the Nisshin Maru to offload any whales they may have harpooned and pick up stores.

But the chase is serious because one of these smaller whalers, the Yusshin Maru No. 2, has already clashed with the Irwin and ran from it with two of the Sea Shepherd boat's crew. In an act of extraordinary courage - or stupidity - Giles Lane from Brighton and Benjamin Potts from Australia leapt aboard the Yusshin Maru No. 2 from the Irwin to deliver a letter to the Japanese captain requesting him to leave the whale sanctuary. The Japanese, not believing their luck, promptly held them captive and sped over the horizon. This sparked an international diplomatic incident.

The drama is reaching its climax. The last time all these characters met in the Antarctic, almost a year ago, there was an international incident and several near disasters. Over a period of more than a week, acid and mud, as well as water cannons and nail guns, were used. There were collisions, shouting matches and three distress flares had to be launched ? first by Sea Shepherd when one of its dinghies got separated and its crew was stranded on an ice floe, then by one of the Japanese ships when it was rammed by the Sea Shepherd ship the Robert Hunter, and lastly by the Nisshin Maru again when it caught fire and one man died. As is customary at sea, everyone stopped fighting each other to help those in distress.

This time, the environmentalists are aware they could be sailing in to a carefully laid trap set by the Japanese fleet, which is clearly intending to regroup and draw in its hunters. "Anything could happen", said Greenpeace's Dave Walsh, on board the Esperanza.

It is clear that there is far more at stake than a chase. Sea Shepherd and Greenpeace might both be pursuing the same whaling ships, but at play in the southern ocean are large egos, corporate pride, old jealousies, intense rivalries, distrust and fundamental differences of opinion about the environment, protest and confrontation.  

While the crews undoubtedly have deep respect for each other in such dangerous conditions, they are in official or semi-official conflict.
The two organizations, Greenpeace and Sea Shepherd, are as different as chalk and cheese. The tactics they use are different. Sea Shepherd thinks nothing of chucking acid, stink bombs, urine or even chocolate cake at its adversaries.

It will try to foul ships by putting ropes round their propellers and, led by Watson, the crew has crept on to its enemies' boats at night and opened the stopcocks to sink them. Greenpeace's main tactic is to put itself between the whales and the whalers, or in the paths of survey ships ? not safe, but highly effective. Its rule is non-violent direct action.

Greenpeace said, "We're not working together in any way. We have our interpretation [of direct action] and they have theirs, and we stick to ours," said a spokesperson. "We are a confrontational organization. We will put ourselves at risk, but no one else. We would never endanger sailors on other ships. Our argument is not with the guys on the ships; it is with the [Japanese] ministries".

Watson is far more personal. "We are obsessed with stopping the cetacean Death Star, that vicious, cruel killing machine otherwise known as the Nisshin Maru, and her fleet of boats armed with explosive harpoons. We know that if we kill the whales, the sharks, the seals and the sea turtles, we will destroy the very foundation of life in the oceans," he says.

Both Sea Shepherd and Greenpeace know they will meet in the Antarctic regularly and fall out with each other constantly. But meanwhile, there have been no whales killed in the Southern Ocean in the past six days.
