The Vatican has depicted what it claims are women's characteristic traits: "Listening, welcoming, humility, faithfulness, praise and waiting." In its most important statement on the role of women in almost a decade, the Roman Catholic Church said these virtues of the Virgin Mary were ones women displayed "with particular intensity and naturalness". 

The 37-page statement was written by the Pope's leading theologian, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger. As a statement of official doctrine, it would have been read, and very likely amended, by the Pope himself before publication. The document, which will prompt a fierce debate about the attributes of women, added: "Although a certain type of feminist rhetoric makes demands 'for ourselves', women preserve the deep intuition of the goodness in their lives of those actions that elicit life, and contribute to the growth and protection [of others]. This intuition is linked to women's physical capacity to give life. Whether lived out or remaining potential, this capacity is a reality that structures the female personality in a profound way." 

In his Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic Church on the Collaboration of Men and Women in the Church and in the World, Cardinal Ratzinger takes aim at "currents of thought that are often at variance with the authentic advancement of women". Chief among these is a tendency to "emphasise strongly conditions of subordination in order to give rise to antagonism". It implied that "women, in order to be themselves, must make themselves the adversaries of men". Such confrontational thinking was "leading to harmful confusion . . . which has its most immediate and lethal effects in the structure of the family". 

Gender war encouraged a perilous blurring of the distinctions. "To avoid the domination of one sex or the other, their differences tend to be denied, viewed as mere effects of historical and cultural conditioning." Such a view ignored qualities that arose from a woman's unique ability to give birth. This "allows her to acquire maturity very quickly, and gives a sense of the seriousness of life and of its responsibilities. A sense and a respect for what is concrete develop in her, opposed to abstractions which are so often fatal for the existence of individuals and society". The cardinal uses the document to argue that, becausethey have something unique to contribute, "women should be present in the world of work and in the organisation of society". 

The comments drew a mixed reaction from feminists and women writers. Erin Pizzey, founder of the international women's refuge movement, said: "I don't think the Catholic Church, whose priests and bishops cannot marry, is in a position to make such statements." 

But Catherine Pepinster, editor of the British Catholic journal The Tablet, said the comments would resonate with many women. "For feminists to rubbish it is a knee-jerk response. It does make a distinction between the sexes, but it also points out that women have a big role to play in society." 



