Tony Blair today announced he was stepping down after 10 years as prime minister and 13 as Labour leader. The prime minister told a crowd of supporters he would stand down as PM on June 27. He will tender his resignation to the Queen on that day. In an emotional speech, he said the judgment on his 10-year administration was "for you, the people, to make". Mr Blair paid special tribute to his wife and children "who never let me forget my failings". But he concluded: "Hand on heart, I did what I thought was right. I may have been wrong - that's your call. But I did what I thought was right for our country. This country is a blessed country. The British are special. The world knows it, we know it, this is the greatest country on earth."

He dealt directly with Iraq, many people's perception as his ultimate legacy, saying: "The criticism since ... has been fierce, unrelenting and costly." But he insisted: "The terrorists will never give up if we give up."

Mr Blair admitted that in May 1997, when Labour took over after 18 years of Tory rule, "expectations were too high." But he added: "I would not want it any other way. I was, and remain, an optimist." Pointing to Africa, climate change and globalization, he declared Britain had changed under his 10-year leadership, saying: "Britain is not a follower, Britain is a leader." He made no reference as to whether he would stay on as an MP.

Mr Blair acknowledged he had been accused of "messianic zeal", but said as prime minister, over issues such as Sierra Leone, Kosovo and then Afghanistan and Iraq, you were "alone with your instinct".

Earlier, the PM had confirmed to the cabinet he would announce his plans to step down, joking it was "not quite a normal day". The meeting ended with the entire cabinet "thumping" the table in appreciation, according to Mr Blair's official spokesman. While Mr Blair flew to the north-east, the likely next prime minister was in the Commons, answering questions about the economy. "There are, of course, 600,000 job vacancies in the economy ? there's one more today actually as a result of announcements that have just been made," Gordon Brown joked to laughter from all sides.

Tributes have already started flowing in to the departing 54-year old prime minister, whose future plans are not yet clear. Former US secretary of state Colin Powell said Mr Blair had "an enormous impact on world politics, and he certainly has had an enormous impact on the special relationship between the United States and Great Britain. He has been a friend, he has been steadfast in the face of negative public opinion, and in the face of crises he's stood steady. And we could always count on him."

Lindsey German, convenor of the Stop the War coalition, said: "We cannot let this day pass without marking the deadly legacy of Tony Blair with the war in Iraq, but this is about the future as well."

Meanwhile, the Liberal Democrats demanded an immediate general election to legitimize Mr Blair's successor. The party leader, Sir Menzies Campbell, has tabled a Commons motion calling on the Queen to dissolve parliament immediately, since Mr Blair promised to serve a "full third term" in 2005. Mr Brown, facing a financially straitened Labour party and poor opinion polls, is highly unlikely to grant that request.

Mr Blair was unique among Labour leaders in winning three successive elections. Although announcing before the 2005 contest he would serve a "full third term", a mini-putsch by Labour MPs last autumn forced him to confirm he would stand down within a year. The final act of that saga was enacted today.