Last July, it took Lisa Nowak 12 days, 18 hours, 37 minutes and 54 seconds, travelling a distance of 5.3 million miles, to win her position in one of the world's most elite clubs: travellers in space. Last Monday, it took her about 14 hours, and a journey of 950 miles, to lose it.

Yesterday, Mrs Nowak was charged with attempted first-degree murder in the most bizarre incident involving any of NASA's active-duty astronauts. The charge, together with others of attempted kidnapping and battery, relate to an apparent love triangle she was involved in with a fellow male astronaut and a female air force captain whom she suspected of being a rival to his affections. 

A Florida judge ruled last night that Mrs Nowak could be fitted with a tracking device and released from custody if she could come up with $25,000 (GBP13,000) bail and did not contact her alleged victim.

To say the group to which 43-year-old Mrs Nowak belongs is 'select' is an understatement: she is one of only 97 astronauts currently trained and ready to fly, 20 of them women. NASA has selected a total of just 321 astronauts since the US agency began preparing to go into space in 1959.

All of which makes her behaviour in the early hours of Monday so baffling. The married mother of three, separated from her husband, who had been subjected to NASA's rigorous screening process and trained for 10 years to cope with extreme stress before her flight in the Discovery space shuttle, embarked on her own private mission. 

By her own admission to Orlando police, Mrs Nowak set out on her 950-mile drive from Houston, Texas, to Orlando on Sunday carrying with her a carbon-dioxide powered pellet gun, a folding knife with a four-inch blade, pepper spray, a steel mallet and $600 in cash. She also had several large black bin liners, six latex gloves and rubber tubing, as well as a wig and two hooded trench coats for disguise. 

Most peculiarly, she wore a nappy on the journey to reduce the need for stops ? an in-house trick as astronauts wear nappies during take off and landing. 

The police affidavit states that she had discovered that Colleen Shipman, a US air force captain, was flying in from Houston to Orlando that night.
 
Mrs Nowak wanted to be there to "scare her", she later told police, into talking about her relationship with the man at the centre of the love triangle. 

He is Bill Oefelein, 41, from Alaska, who underwent astronaut training with Mrs Nowak and like her went into space for the first time last year, also on Discovery, although they have never flown together. Evidence of Mrs Nowak's feelings towards Mr Oefelein were found in a letter in her car, together with emails between him and Ms Shipman, as well as directions to Ms Shipman's house. In her statement to police, Mrs Nowak said she had "more than a working relationship, but less than a romantic relationship" with him. 

Ms Shipman allegedly saw Mrs Nowak, whom she had never met before, wearing a hooded trench coat, dark glasses and the wig, following her on a bus from the airport lounge to the car park. Afraid, she hurried to her car. She could hear running footsteps behind her and as she slammed the door Mrs Nowak slapped the window and tried to pull the door open. 

"Can you help me, please? My boyfriend was supposed to pick me up and he is not here," Mrs Nowak is alleged to have pleaded. When Ms Shipman said she could not help, the astronaut started to cry. Ms Shipman wound down her window a couple of inches at which Mrs Nowak let off the pepper spray. Ms Shipman drove off, her eyes burning, and raised the alarm. She alleges the astronaut had been stalking her for around two months. 

Sergeant Barb Jones of Orlando police said last night: "The intent was there to cause serious bodily injury or death." Mrs Nowak's behaviour and subsequent appearance in court has amazed people in the rarefied world of space exploration. Tariq Malik, who covers shuttle missions for the website space.com and who interviewed Mrs Nowak shortly before she went into space, said astronauts were carefully chosen and trained so that surprises did not happen. 

"They go through deep medical and psychological screening," he said. "They have to fly in very cramped spaces and under intense stress so they have to be able to cope."

Mrs Nowak had a key technical role in the July flight, in charge of a robotic arm for repairing the international space station with which it docked. 

Before the mission, she said she had first become interested in space at the age of five when she watched the moon landing on television, and on visits to the Air and Space Museum in Washington. 

Her official photograph taken before the flight shows her in full astronaut's suit, smiling broadly. Yesterday a picture with a difference was running on TV screens: Mrs Nowak as she was booked into jail, her forehead creased, eyes pinched, shoulders hunched and hair askew. NASA put her on a 30-day suspension and removed her from all shuttle mission activities.