A little American spacecraft flew into a comet the size of a city last week 133m km from Earth, taking pictures at the rate of one a minute before it vaporised in an explosion equivalent to exploding five tonnes of TNT. 

The $335m mission involved split-second timing, collision speeds of 37,000km/h and a triumphant series of pictures that ended with a close-up just three seconds before the craft's own destruction. "Right now we are minus one spacecraft," a delighted NASA engineer said, while a colleague at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena said, "There is a comet in the sky wondering what the hell hit it." Deep Impact was a July 4 fireworks display which took many years to plan and which ended in a flash. 

A mothership dropped a copper projectile the size of a washing machine in the path of comet Tempel 1 and then photographed the resulting jet of ice, dust and organic chemicals from the surface, as the explosion excavated a huge impact crater and dramatically intensified the native brightness of the mysterious visitor.
 
The celestial traffic accident obliterated the projectile but barely affected the comet: experts estimate that the impact would have slowed it by no more than 1/10,000th of a millimetre a second. The aim was to probe for the first time the interior of one of the ghostly visitors that have haunted human imagination throughout history. It is likely to become one of the most intensely studied encounters made in space. Deep Impact's copper-coated bullet carried its own camera and radio.
 
The mothership steered a course 480km from the explosion and observed the impact, and the ensuing jet eruption, with instruments for 800 seconds. Seven satellites, including the Hubble space telescope, monitored the moment of drama, and over the next day and night an estimated 50 earthbound telescopes locked on the tiny, faraway flare. 

The first to produce pictures in Britain, even ahead of NASA, were pupils from King's school, Canterbury, using data from the 2m Faulkes telescope in Hawaii, an instrument intended for schools. But long before giant telescopes could begin to analyse the minutiae of the collision in the optical ultraviolet, infra-red and x-ray wavelengths, astronomers and planetary scientists from the US and around the world were enjoying a moment of triumph. For the first time, they had clear and close-up studies of a comet. They could count the impact craters on its surface, they could hazard an early guess at its density and they could estimate the firmness of its surface from the violence of the flare after the collision. And in the gusts of material ejected from the collision crater, they could begin to see the pristine raw material of the whole solar system. 

Frequent visitors such as comet Halley fly close to the sun and have been weathered and altered by solar radiation. But comets such as Tempel 1 have spent most of the past 4.6bn years parked far beyond the orbit of the outermost planets. Because of their relative isolation, these icy time capsules could hold the secrets of the planets, the Earth's oceans and even of the primeval organic chemistry from which life must have been fashioned. "If you are thinking of comets as possible sources of organic material, then you want the organic elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen. And we now know enough about comets to know that some of these elements are in the form of organic molecules," said John Zarnecki of the Open University. 

For Andrew Coates of the Mullard space science laboratory of University College London, it was one of the most audacious experiments in history. "You have the comet getting bigger and bigger in the field of view, the level of detail on the comet getting better and better," he said. "We know that comets produce jets. What we have now is the first artificial jet from a comet," he added. "The fact that there are craters tells us the surface has a solid type of composition. We see a relatively dark surface, probably some organic molecules and silicates, and it is the composition of that mixture which is going to be really exciting." 