At Milan, Juventus and Real Madrid the players called Fabio Capello 'Mister', the name given to generations of managers in Italy and Spain as a result of the many British coaches who spread the game around the world. In England, however, he will have another title. The players can call him 'Boss', Capello declared yesterday.

To the England football squad the Italian's iron word will be law. And that means no wasting time with computer games, no strolling down to breakfast at whatever time suits the individual, and absolutely no golf in the run-up to international football matches.

"After the match they can play all the golf they like," Capello said with a grim smile during a press conference, when he explained the need for a code of behaviour.

"We are only together for a short time," he said, "and in that time you need to try and work and create a way of working. To do that you need to set some rules. Eating together and getting up from the table at the same time and being punctual - these things are about respect for other people and for each other. We don't have a long time to create a group mentality. It's important to spend time together."

Capello continued: "We need to work in an orderly fashion. Compared to football clubs, we don't have many days together. Therefore we need strict rules. If we follow those rules, we'll create a group and a specific winning mentality, which is what I want."

"People make mistakes but, if they want to be part of this group, they will follow the rules. If someone doesn't, then we will analyze why the rules were broken and take the appropriate course of action."

At the press conference, headphones were provided for journalists needing a simultaneous translation from the manager's native tongue. "I will speak English with you when I am sure that I know all the terms and all the right words," he said. "You are good at twisting things, so I want to be very careful. But with the players I can explain and communicate in English and I'm happy about that."

Capello's objective is to create a unified team in time for the first World Cup qualifying game against Andorra in September. In the meantime he will be studying videos of each friendly match and passing on his observations to the players. 

"We've worked very hard on the tactical front for the last few days, all of this in order to create a group mentality and, more importantly, a way of moving on the pitch that reflects my ideas about football," he said. "I've seen some English clubs move on the pitch in the way I want my team to move. So for some it won't be anything new. Others who aren't used to moving this way will have to adapt."

On the psychological front, his principal task will be to restore the self-belief so badly damaged by failure to qualify for Euro 2008. But that, as he pointed out, is not an overnight job.

"I want the team to regain their winning mentality by being confident in their own resources and by playing bravely. I believe we need to leave the past behind. We need a positive mind-set and to look ahead. But we can't perform miracles. We've only just started our work. Give us time to show results."

And after a month in England, what was his view of England's players? "I think players are the same everywhere," he concluded. "My first impressions of these players are very good. They're very attentive and eager to impress. With this spirit and mentality I believe we will be able to do very well."

