Scientists hope to release GM mosquitoes into the wild in an attempt to wipe out malaria. They should be extremely wary, says James Randerson - introducing new species has often proved disastrous.

It is a daring scientific project that could offer hope to 300 million malaria sufferers worldwide. The plan is to genetically alter the mosquitoes in countries with malaria, so that the insects can no longer carry the malaria parasite - and so can't transfer it to people. Without its taxi service, the disease would rapidly die out. 

Although the release of genetically modified insects is not a new idea, it was given fresh importance this week by new work from a team at Johns Hopkins University in Maryland. The scientists there cannot yet prove what would actually happen if GM mosquitoes were released into the wild. However, their lab studies suggest that insects carrying a gene that resists malaria would not simply die out as soon as they encountered normal mosquitoes - and might even start to take over. 

Many human lives might be saved. But what consequences would result from releasing millions of GM-insects into the wild? Would the gene they carry have unintended side-effects when the mosquito is in its natural habitat? Could the gene jump into other species? Because large scale releases of GM animals have never been carried out, these questions are hard to answer. 

However, the long list of ecological disasters that have followed both deliberate and accidental releases of non-native species into new environments will make scientists - and non-scientists - extremely wary. 

"If new species get out of their ecosystem and are not kept under control by other processes, they start to cause trouble," says Deborah Long at Plantlife Scotland. New species may have no natural predators, or may encounter prey that cannot defend themselves against their hunting strategies. New species can also affect local plants and animals by bringing in diseases they have not met before. 

"This is a particular problem for islands and the southern hemisphere," says Andre Farrar, a spokesman for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. In the past, small oceanic islands in the southern hemisphere tended not to have any land-based predators because mammals simply couldn't get there. This meant that many bird species nested on the ground. So when European explorers introduced rats, dogs, pigs and cats to the islands, the birds' eggs were easy pickings. When the brown tree snake (native to Australia) was accidentally introduced to Guam in the western Pacific in the 1950s, for example, it devastated local bird populations. 

The cooking pots of Portuguese sailors are often blamed for the extinction of the dodo. But it was probably the animals they brought with them to Mauritius that really finished them off. 

There are many examples of disasters. In Australia, rabbits were introduced and quickly ran out of control, destroying native species. Despite huge efforts to get rid of them, they are still a major pest. The coypu, a large rodent, was introduced from South America into parts of North America and now cause damage to the environment in wetlands there. The aggressive African honeybee was introduced to Brazil in the 1950s and spread, displacing and interbreeding with European honeybees that came to South America with the first Europeans. It is much more aggressive than native species, attacking people and animals. Meanwhile, water hyacinth was introduced to Africa and elsewhere from South America in the 19th century. It now clogs up waterways, making them impassable. 

Even in this country, foreign invaders are a huge problem for conservationists. The worst one is Japanese knotweed, which thrives in gardens. "Japanese knotweed causes massive problems for home owners," says Dr Long. The weed can grow through walls and concrete, as well as taking over gardens. "It causes massive social and economic problems as well as conservation problems." 

Another problem plant is rhododendron ponticum, which is taking over the so-called 'Celtic rainforest' woodlands of the west coast of Scotland and Wales. These fairytale woodlands are internationally important because of the special plants there, says Long. But to thrive, the plants require precise amounts of light and water, which are provided by the humid atmosphere of the forest. The invading rhododendrons, which were introduced by Victorian gardeners, shade out the native plants.
 
The destructive cane toad of Australia is also the result of a failed attempt at biological control. The toad was brought in to control sugar-cane pests in 1935. But it soon began preying on - and out-competing - native species. It now occupies much of the north east of Australia. Getting rid of the invasive species, as Australia's rabbits and cane toads have shown, often proves much more difficult than introducing it. Despite continuing efforts to control the cane toads, their seemingly unstoppable march continues. 

Perhaps the worst example of a disastrous introduction is that of the snails of French Polynesia. In 1975, the wolf snail was deliberately introduced to stop the spread of the previously introduced giant African land snail. But the predatory wolf mostly ignored its intended prey and instead developed a taste for the smaller native partula snails. Since then, 72% of the partula species have become extinct and only five remain. 

But there have been successes in eradication, especially on the islands where introduced species can cause most damage. "It is expensive, it is time-consuming but is potentially very effective," says Farrar. The ground-nesting kakapo parrot from New Zealand, for example, has been given new life by transferring it to islands without rats and ferrets.

So what are the lessons here for introducing GM-mosquitoes? It can be argued that putting a new mosquito with an extra gene into a place where there are lots of mosquitoes already is not as bad as introducing an entirely new species with hunting strategies, immune defences and diseases that are entirely new to the local fauna. That change may not be very different from something that has happened countless times in evolution - a random mutation to a gene that gives the mosquito resistance to a parasite. Finally, though, it will probably be what people think is a risk rather than the actual risks that matters. GM-crops had no chance in Europe because of 'what-if?' fears: in the end, scientists' opinions had no influence. If public opinion in African countries is strongly against the GM-mosquito, or if people feel that a technology rejected by Europe is being forced onto them, it will never happen.
