Thousands of endangered animals supposedly protected by law are being traded openly on the internet and sold as "exotic pets", say wildlife crime investigators working with an international animal charity.
 
An investigation of nearly 100 websites based around the world found a "shocking" selection of rare and endangered animals for sale. They included a hand-reared Siberian tiger ($70,000), an adolescent gorilla ($8,100) advertised as being in London, and other rare primates, falcons, seahorses and whole shells of turtles. One of the most expensive was a "sweet-natured" two-year-old giraffe being sold for $15,500 in the US. "He has never been bad-tempered with me. A loving home is a must," said the anonymous owner. The internet has revolutionised shopping for books, DVDs and airline tickets, but it has also opened up great opportunities to deal in illegal wildlife which, according to the United Nations, is worth billions of dollars a year and now rivals the arms and drug trades in scale. "Within one week we found over 9,000 wild animal products and specimens, and wild animals for sale, predominantly from species protected by law," says the report for the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). "More than 100 traders were identified, each advertising an unnamed, unspecified number of items," said the authors of the report.
 
The range of live endangered animals for sale could have set up whole zoos, and the parts of dead animals found on the web would have stocked streets of Chinese pharmacies. "They included some of the world's most endangered species," the report says. "There were live Amazonian parrots, wild cats, a green turtle which the seller claimed was captured from a Southeast Asian rainforest; even a live pet lion." A total of 146 live primates were found in a week, some being advertised before they were even born. Commercial trade in any primate species is either prohibited or subject to strict controls. The gorilla for sale in London might not have actually existed, said an IFAW spokeswoman on Monday. "Possibly it was a Congo-based operation which would capture an animal to order." Guaranteed to be real, however, were the hawksbill turtle shells, shahtoosh shawls from the Tibetan antelope and taxidermy specimens of lions and peregrine falcons - the last a protected British species - which were all found, along with a stuffed polar bear that was billed as being Victorian but looked suspiciously fresh.
 
Although thousands of species are in steep decline worldwide, quantity does not appear to be a problem for the sellers, who IFAW found ranged from individuals hoping to make money on a one-off exotic pet to professional traders who appeared to have access to a regular supply. 

Neither did the fact that it is illegal to trade in the species worry the sellers. Many seemed unperturbed or unaware of the law. 

