Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama came face-to-face on January 15 for the first time since their two camps embarked on the dangerous strategy of trying to gain politically from the race issue.

After Obama's victory in Iowa and Clinton's in New Hampshire, the two candidates - who met for a debate in Las Vegas on Tuesday - were looking to break the tie in Nevada on Saturday or South Carolina the following week.

The increasingly bitter and ugly exchanges over race reflect the importance of South Carolina, where about half the Democratic voters are African-American. The Obama team today accused Clinton of being "engaged in the politics of personal destruction".

The Clinton team has been forced to defend themselves over a series of remarks that have been interpreted as racially tinged. The most controversial was a comment from Clinton that suggested she was trying to minimize the role of Martin Luther King in the civil rights era. The Clinton team accused Obama of distorting the remarks. Obama rejected the charges.

Meanwhile, Bob Johnson, a founder of the Black Entertainment Television who is among Clinton's most prominent African-American supporters, revived the issue of Obama's teenage drug use, which he wrote about in his memoir, Dreams From My Father.

During an introduction for Clinton at an event, Johnson said Hillary and Bill Clinton were engaged in black issues when Obama "was doing something in the neighbourhood: I won't say what he was doing, but he said it in his book".

Johnson later said that his comments referred to Obama's work as a community organizer in Chicago "and nothing else. Any other suggestion is simply irresponsible and incorrect". The Obama team demanded an apology.

Bill Shaheen, a New Hampshire Clinton campaign official, resigned last month after suggesting Democrats should be wary of nominating Obama because of his past drug use.

In what seems to have been another misjudged remark, Obama's wife, Michelle, campaigning for him in South Carolina, also brought up race. Addressing African-Americans sceptical about his ability to win, she said Iowa, which is predominantly white, voted for Obama. "Ain't no black people in Iowa," she said.

The language could alienate some white voters and the comment is also factually wrong ? there are 75,000 African-Americans in Iowa. John Edwards, who is trailing at 11%, supported Obama in the race row. The former North Carolina senator has recently gone out of his way to find a common cause with Obama. The association with Obama has led to speculation that Edwards is trying to become Obama's vice presidential running mate.

A legal dispute over the role of unions in Nevada has also raised issues of race, with Obama and Clinton competing for the support of Latinos, who make up about a quarter of the state's population.

Obama campaigned in Nevada on 14 January while Clinton held an event in New York, fixed before the row, to mark Martin Luther King's birthday the following day.

A poll for the Washington Post-ABC News today showed Obama closing the gap nationwide, with Clinton on 42%, down 11% since last month, and Obama on 37%, up 14%. But a national CBS News-New York Times poll had Clinton on 42% to Obama's 27%, almost unchanged since last month.

