In all the newspaper reports and hours of satellite television coverage devoted to last week's carnage in the schoolhouse in Nickel Mines, Pennsylvania, it was the little details that stood out and made you think. The fact that the police had to use vans to take the parents to hospital to be at the bedsides of their mortally wounded children because they refused to go by police helicopter. The scene of worried mothers timidly peeking over the heads of television cameramen filming a press conference near the school: while the pictures were being beamed instantly to Shanghai, they had to be there in person as they had no televisions at home. There is something about those snippets of life in the Amish community of Lancaster county that is strangely hard to deal with. On top of the sheer horror of the killing of five girls by a milk truck driver, there is bewilderment. How can it be, in this digital age where news spreads at the speed of light, that people living within a few miles of the tragedy were still learning by word of mouth what Charles Roberts had done hours after he had unloaded his 9mm semi-automatic handgun?

How can it be that he chose to inflict his revenge for some insult he suffered at the age of 12 on girls from a community whose very existence is the antithesis of the act he committed? The Amish are pacifist. At time of war they are conscientious objectors, prepared for civilian duties but refusing anything military. The community where Roberts exacted his revenge, 80km west of Philadelphia, has no police force and no guns. In the United States that is quite something. Anyone who can recall Witness, the 1985 Harrison Ford thriller, will have a feeling for the setting of Lancaster county. Green rolling hills with Holstein cattle, weather-beaten barns, unadorned buildings, and black horse-drawn buggies. Add to that the 'plain' dress, as they call it and it all looks like what it is - a community of agrarians largely unchanged since the late 19th century. Note the word largely. Among the many misrepresentations of the Amish is that they are a group that is completely opposed to modernity.

In reality, they are the product of change, some of it dramatic. The emergence of today's Amishes is a story of many schisms. Their parent faith, Mennonitism, was born of a split in Switzerland in 1525, when the Mennonites broke from the Protestant reform. Later, in Switzerland in 1693, the Amish broke from the wider Mennonite community in another dispute. The Amish emigrated to Pennsylvania around the 1730s to benefit from the Quaker William Penn's offer of protection for persecuted religions. The Old Order of Amishes, the predominant group of people in Lancaster county, was then formed by another schism when they broke from their fellow members in a dispute over the technological changes brought by the industrial revolution. The Old Order was determined to take from technology only those elements that matched their interpretation of the Bible. 

"It is easy to get it wrong about the Amish," says Peter Seibert, president of the Heritage Centre of Lancaster county and a non-Amish. "They are not about putting up walls to block out the modern world. What they are about is adapting their community to modernity in order to preserve its essential being as a simple agrarian society. They will pick and choose what they want from our world".

So they will not have television, not because it is intrinsically heinous but because they do not want their children exposed to sexual and violent images. They travel by buggy to keep the community together and avoid the disruptive social influence of the motor car. And there is some modernity in Lancaster county. They will not have phones in the house, but they will in the nearby shed where they run a woodworking business. They won't have electrical gadgets but they will have battery-powered cash registers and even laptops. That's a subtlety lost in the peeping-Tom relationship that the "real world" has with the Amish. 

"Tourists can be quite disrespectful. They walk right into Amish houses or schools assuming that they are there as an attraction. They have no sense that this is a living community that greatly prizes its privacy", says researcher Stephen Scott. The joke is, as Scott points out, that the Amish are the ones who benefit. They may dislike being treated as zoo animals but they also make a great deal of money out of the flow of tourists.

That duality was illustrated most vividly a couple of years ago when a reality TV company shot Amish in the City, a show in which a group of Amish teenagers were taken out of their communities and transported to downtown LA. Yet the Amish faith could accommodate even that. The teenagers were going through what is known as "running around years", the period between the end of school, at the age of 14, and the entry into the church through baptism in one's late teens or early 20s.

In those five to eight years of freedom the children are not officially members of the church so cannot be shunned or excommunicated. The result is a community that is thriving. 80% of the teenagers who move away from the community eventually return. The main pressure on the Amish is now population growth, coupled with a lack of arable land on which they can subsist.

None of this will be any comfort to the parents and neighbours of the five girls who died in last week's shooting or the others who remain critically ill. Any comfort will come from their faith itself. Seibert puts it well: "For them this is God's will, and that is all. Our world is all about the individual. Theirs is all about the community before God and the better life they will lead after death. That is hard for us to comprehend, but that is how it is."
