A baby born in America this week took the nation's population to the 300 million mark. It's highly possible that the baby was the child of a Latin American immigrant, perhaps in Los Angeles. In 1967 Life magazine identified the 200 millionth American as Robert Ken Woo, a fourth-generation Chinese-American from Atlanta. That was pure guesswork too. But there is a real core to this story. America is crossing a population landmark and it is generating the kind of self-reflection that major birthdays or anniversaries do. The US census bureau calculates that one American is born every seven seconds, one dies every 13 seconds, and an immigrant arrives (net) every 31 seconds. Add those together and you get a net population gain of one person every 11 seconds. Over the past 100 years the US has seen the largest population growth in its history, fuelled by the baby boomers of the postwar years. And the trend is set to continue through this century, though the rate of growth is expected to peak about 2070. If it took 39 years to put on the last 100 million, it will take 37 years to put on the next, to reach 400 million.

Behind those figures lie shifting demographic plates that are seeing the composition of America, its human make-up, and even its culture and lifestyles, change dramatically. The first of these tectonic shifts is where Americans live. The demographic centre of gravity is slowly veering from the northeast to the south and west. The fastest-growing states are Nevada, Arizona and Texas. Nor is the population evenly dispersed. More than half live in 10 of the 50 states, most of them along the coasts. 

William Frey, a population expert at the Brookings Institution in Washington, said the US was gravitating to a new sunbelt beyond Florida, Texas and California. "As the coastal areas become crowded, people have started to move further inland to places like Arizona, Nevada, Georgia and Tennessee." The obverse of this trend is that the Great Plains, the cultural bedrock of cowboy America, is becoming increasingly a myth. The midwestern states are emptying as the population becomes more urbanised. Or, more accurately, suburbanised. In the past 100 years the proportion of Americans living inside the urban and suburban sprawl doubled to 80%. The concept of the 'frontier', of existence under an open sky, still exists in movies, but fewer and fewer people live it.

It is also having an impact on the environment. According to the Centre for Environment and Population, an independent research body, the effects of a growing population are concentrated in the outskirts of urban areas and are amplified by Americans' belief that bigger equals better. "When I travel abroad and come back, I'm always stunned by the consumption here. Cars are bigger, people travel further distances, they build bigger houses. This is the ultimate disposable consumer society," the centre's director, Victoria Markham, said. It is often quoted that the US has 5% of the world's population but uses 25% of its energy. Less known is that each American now occupies about 20% more land for housing, schools, shops, roads and so on than he or she did 20 years ago. Almost 3,000 acres (1,214 hectares) of farmland are concreted over every day, and the rate is increasing. 

Which leads to the most contentious seismic movement: America's ethnic composition and the role of immigration. In 1970 the newly immigrant proportion of the American people stood at 5%. Today it is 12.1% and rising. The largest single national group of immigrants is Mexican, and the largest ethnic group Hispanic. By 2050 it is projected by the census bureau that the proportion of non-Hispanic whites will have fallen from 69% in 2000 to about 50%, Hispanics will have doubled to 24%, Asians also to 8%, while the proportion of African-Americans will increase marginally to 14%. For Mr Frey, the rise of the Hispanic community, with their younger average ages and higher birthrates, is a saving grace in a rapidly ageing white population. For Roy Beck, president of NumbersUSA, a research group focusing on immigration, the population growth is "federally forced". He said the long-term increase could be put down entirely to immigration. "If we had zero net immigration we would never have reached 300 million we'd be about 245 million today." The result, he says, is more congestion and restrictions and the decline of individualism, freedom and space. In short, America is turning into Europe.
