The emoticon is 25 years old. In 1982, a Pittsburgh professor, Scott Fahlman, noted that the electronic mail of his students lacked the necessary body language and voice tones to express greetings and humour. The smiley was born, and with it a large lexicon of symbols intended to insert normal human emotion into the frigid alphabet. A?Z might have sufficed for Shakespeare, Milton, Keats and Shelley, but for today's global nerd it is not up to scratch.

Early telegraphy had its own short forms and icons. Users realized that abbreviated language risked unintentional pain and embarrassment. Hence an apparently sarcastic or abrupt remark might be softened by a simple symbol. The result was not just smileys but frownies and various signs of perplexity, love, anger and surprise. 

There are 16 pages of emoticons in Andrew John's Txtr's A?Z ? my favourite being }:-( for 'your toupee is blowing in the wind'. An indication of the keyboard's evolution is that many computers automatically convert the frownie into . In other words, and have become formal symbols in the Internet lexicon. 

I confess to seeing the problem. I have seldom sent a personal email or text message which I have not afterwards, to some degree, regretted. The old-fashioned pen slowed the transition from spoken word (and intended meaning) to script. It gave time for consideration, as did the manual typewriter. Writing involved effort. A word was pondered before being put to paper, packaged and sent through the post. 

In comparison, the computer keyboard is an invisible piano on which we play instantly and extempore. First thoughts race into fully-formed words and sentences with no pause for revision, let alone perfection. As soon as they are on screen they acquire validity. Over them hovers the dreaded send button, itching to be pressed - 'send' is always pressed too soon.

There is no wait for the post to go, no time to correct what is written. Nor is there any certainty that an email has arrived, just the plaintive call: "Did you get my email ... why didn't you reply?" All is then regret. I should have read it through one more time. Hardly surprising then that we crave the soothing balm of the emoticon.

How on earth did we manage before? Somehow we communicated love, hurt, remorse, anger and joy under the bountiful guidance of the Oxford English Dictionary. We used quill, pen, pencil, ballpoint, even typewriter, and if anything went wrong we had the telephone as backup. But why is email so lacking in feeling that it requires its own additional alphabet? How much sincerity really is conveyed by ??

The authors of a book on 'netiquette' come straight to the point: "On email people aren't quite themselves ... they are angrier, less sympathetic, less aware, more easily wounded, even more gossipy and duplicitous." Some have even wrecked their marriages, lost their jobs and ended up in jail.Many of us do not know how to handle email. Do we start Dear Sir or Hi gorgeous, or get straight down to business? Do we cover the screen with capitals, exclamation marks and emoticons in a desperate effort to convey attitude? Do we sign off with Yours sincerely, Kind regards or Byeee!?

Even such simple words as please, thank you and sorry have a hundred subtle meanings when voiced but are toneless when lying flat on the screen. The truth is that, for other than routine messages and acknowledgements, email has become an inadequate substitute for both the telephone and the letter. Compared to the telephone, email is a distancing device. It not only eliminates tone of voice, it prevents interruption or response. It is a one-way conversation, a monologue, with all the rudeness that can imply. Compared to a letter, email has more immediacy but carries none of the humanity, not to mention courtesy, of handwriting. 

Emails ought to carry a health warning at the top: 'This note may unintentionally mislead or upset you; if in doubt reply by phone or consult a counsellor.' Emails are bad at conveying humour or criticism, bad news or sympathy. The form is too cold. Those who wish to communicate sincerity to another human being should telephone and, if necessary, leave a voice message.

Better still, clear your desk, take out a crisp sheet of note paper, pick up a pen and do something you may not have done for ages. Write a proper letter, rewriting it if necessary. The recipient will be amazed and delighted that you have taken the time. You will have written what you meant to say, and I bet you won't have used emoticons.

