The British government recently invoked the Parliament Act, overriding the opposition of the House of Lords and bringing to an end almost 700 years of fox-huntingin England and Wales. Within hours, the Queen gave her royal assent and the total ban on hunting with dogs will be enforced. 

In the first signs of the campaign of civil disobedience and protest promised by pro-hunt supporters, a demonstration was staged at the state banquet at Windsor Castle where the Queen was hosting the French president, Jacques Chirac, and Tony Blair. 

After a day of parliamentary confusion, Mr. Blair conceded that his efforts to delay the Act until after the British general election had failed. 

There are 318 registered hound packs in England and Wales, including 184 foxhound packs. Around 8,000 jobs depend on hunting, while 15,000 to 16,000 people, such as hoteliers, could also be affected by the ban. The government and police forces around the country must now get ready for the possibility of unrest over the next three months. 

Parliament was marked by political manoeuvring by both pro- and anti-hunters as they sought to cast their opponents as the true enemies of compromise and reason. The government made a final attempt to reach a compromise but this was unsuccessful. 

By a majority of 151 the MPs agreed to delay the implementation of the bill until July 2006, but rejected the government's preferred option of 2007. Within hours the Lords, albeit by the surprisingly narrow margin of 153 to 114, voted to reject the 18-month delay, leaving the Speaker with no alternative but to invoke the Parliament Act to override the peers' objections. 

Tony Blair voiced regret at the outcome of the votes. Explaining that he had been seeking a way through "very, very entrenched views on both sides", the prime minister accepted that hunting would now be a legal and election issue: "There are people who feel passionately that hunting is integral to their way of life. There are people who feel equally passionate that it is barbaric and cruel." 

With the threat of running battles between police, hunters and landowners ahead of the election the pro-hunt, campaigners were urged to accept the will of parliament. "The hunting community say they are law-abiding people, so we expect those involved in hunting to cease their activity when they are required by law to do so," said one MP. The Tory rural affairs spokesman, James Gray, called for mass legal disobedience. Quoting Shakespeare, he said passing a ban with no delay sent a message to the countryside that read: "Cry havoc and let loose the dogs of war." 

Simon Hart, chief executive of the Countryside Alliance, was furious to see his seven-year battle fail. "The chaos and deceit that has surrounded today's eventsis a fitting finale to what has been one of the most ridiculous, dishonest and time-consuming episodes in parliamentary history," he said. 

Within 24 hours the alliance had made good its threat to launch a legal challenge against the ban, saying it was confident it could prove that the 1949 Parliament Act had always been illegal, although it has been used four times, once by Margaret Thatcher. 

Meanwhile there was further confusion last weekend when the Home Secretary, David Blunkett, warned that police needed more time to gather intelligence on rebels and suggested that riders would not be prosecuted for killing foxes unless it was clearly deliberate. He said he had wanted the ban delayed to allow detailed preparations to combat the expected mass disobedience. 

Police have warned that they could be stretched to the limit in dealing with the disorder. Jan Berry, who chairs the Police Federation of England and Wales, said that opposition to the new law would put a huge strain on small rural forces. 