The fizzy drink of choice at PepsiCo on December 12 was more likely to have been champagne than cola. By the end of trading on Wall Street that day, the company's market capitalisation reached $98.4bn - while the market valued rival Coca-Cola at $97.9bn. For the first time in the history of the two companies, PepsiCo was valued more highly than its old arch enemy. It was chiefly a symbolic shift, but what a symbol - and one that persisted over ensuing days. The "real thing" is suddenly second-best.

The battle for supremacy between Coca-Cola and PepsiCo is one of the great rivalries in business. The two firms remain the number one case study for marketing students on how to create a powerful brand around something as humble as brown carbonated water laced with caffeine and vegetable extracts. More recently they have become case studies for another reason: PepsiCo for its ability to spot consumer trends and adapt its business to a changing climate; Coca-Cola for failing to do the same, perhaps complacent due to its long history as the number one best-selling drink in the world. 

In early 2000 Coca-Cola's market capitalisation was about $128bn, almost three times that of PepsiCo, which was valued at $44bn. Fizzy drinks sales at both companies are flat in developed markets. The crucial factor in the differing fortunes of the two has been PepsiCo's diversification away from sugary carbonated drinks and the realisation that consumers were worrying more and more about obesity and health.

In 1998 the company acquired the fruit juice business Tropicana. Three years later it won an auction for Quaker Oats, paying $14bn and adding the energy drink Gatorade to its portfolio. Coca-Cola pulled out of the bidding after its independent directors expressed concerns about the high price. That proved a poor decision. Today PepsiCo has about 81% of the fast-growing sports drink market in the US. It has the number one fruit juice brand in Tropicana and the leading bottled water brand in the US, Aquafina. In the most recent quarter sales of PepsiCo's non-carbonated drinks grew by 24%. 

PepsiCo generates about 23% of its worldwide profits from the near-stagnant carbonated drinks sector while Coca-Cola relies on its fizzy drinks for 85% of profits. PepsiCo owns snack foods including Walkers Crisps and Doritos, and its diverse range of products, analysts note, is helping it to gain leverage with supermarket chains.

Coca-Cola is playing catch-up. In June it launched its Minute Maid pure juice range in Britain. It has also introduced the Dasani bottled water brand and the Powerade energy drink. Powerade is about one-fifth as big as Gatorade in the US. When Coca-Cola did eventually launch its bottled water brand in Britain, it met first with derision when the press realised it was distilled tap water and then horror as it was pulled from shelves in a health scare. 

PepsiCo shares have risen 14% the past year while Coca-Cola's fell 1.2%. Coca-Cola's problems appear to have begun with the death in 1997 of the highly regarded chief executive Roberto Goizueta. The company subsequently suffered from under-investment, heavy job cuts and management upheaval. In May 2004 the company hired its third chief executive since Mr Goizueta's death, persuading the Irishman Neville Isdell to come out of retirement. Mr Isdell's appointment received a lukewarm reception on Wall Street. At 60 and a company veteran, he was not seen as the new blood or the agent for change that Coca-Cola needed.

 
Shortly after he joined, Mr Isdell was frank about Coca-Cola's mistakes. He sharply reduced the company's long-term profit and sales targets, and admitted there were "no quick fixes". The company, he said, had missed consumer trends and under-performed since 1997. There had been an absence of "brand-building iconic advertising". He promised an additional $400m for marketing and promised to address emerging markets such as China and India more energetically. The company has committed more funds to product innovation. He has since shaken up management, including the departure of marketing and retail chiefs, and got rid of poorly performing brands including a vanilla variant of Coke and lemon and lime versions of Diet Coke. The most spectacular disaster was the launch of C2, a low carbohydrate version of Coke, which came on the market as the fad for low-carb diets was beginning to wane.  

Mr Isdell appears to have made some progress and analysts have begun to express a cautious optimism. The company has posted improving profits over the past four quarters. Third-quarter earnings were up 37% to $1.28bn, chiefly on the back of double-digit volume growth in developing markets such as China, Russia and Latin America. PepsiCo meanwhile continues to press home its advantage. The company says it is focusing its research and development efforts on healthier products including Tropicana fruit bars and a carbonated version of the brand.


 