Fifteen years ago, the world's television screens relayed images of Daniel arap Moi, Kenya's then president, and myself setting fire to 2,000 elephant tusks. Kenya could have earned millions of dollars by selling the stockpile. But we had to illustrate graphically the impact of the ivory trade, and show that the only way of saving Africa's elephants was to destroy the trade. 

Throughout the 1980s, ivory trading, most of it fed by poaching, had slashed the continent's elephant population from 1.3 million to just 625,000. Kenya, especially, was hit hard: 80% of its elephants were massacred. A few months after the burning, the UN Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (Cites) banned the trade, and the bloodshed slowed. Recently Cites adopted an "action plan" that places further controls on the illegal ivory trade in Africa by calling on African "range states" with large elephant populations to prohibit unregulated domestic sales in ivory. But conservationists say the plan does not go far enough. 

The mantra of "use it or lose it" holds that conservation is only possible if a price is put on the heads of endangered species, and that people in developing countries will only hold back from wiping out species if they can see a financial benefit in preserving them. Yet, historically, trade has been the foremost factor in the decimation of many species, from tigers to cod. Opening up a limited legal trade creates a smokescreen, allowing the illegal market to thrive. Sustainable use may sound reasonable, but in reality it dodges definition. There is a gulf between ecological and economical sustainability. All elephants could be slaughtered tomorrow and yet an economically sustainable ivory trade maintained for years to come with invested profits could provide an income in perpetuity. 

Swayed by a few pro-trade southern African countries, whose fenced-in elephant populations were relatively unaffected by poaching, Cites agreed to allow sales of stockpiled ivory. Subsequently, we have witnessed a resurgence in poaching and ivory seizures. And yet the push to reopen the trade continues: Namibia is asking Cites for an annual ivory export quota, as well as permission to trade in worked ivory, elephant hair and, with South Africa, leather. 

These countries say they have the right to profit from their natural resources. This sounds reasonable until one considers that many poorer countries are campaigning against this. Kenya, supported by many other African states, is proposing a 20-year moratorium on ivory trade. The economics of the ivory trade do not add up. Most countries where elephants live are poor, and the effect of allowing even a limited trade would outweigh any benefits. Already struggling to protect their wildlife, these countries will be the first port of call for poachers. 

With human populations growing, many countries are experiencing serious habitat destruction and human-wildlife conflict. We should compensate farming communities for destruction caused by animals. However, given that Kenya still has only 20% of the elephants it had in 1970, this is an issue to be resolved by developing long-term land-use policies rather than exterminating wildlife. 

Richard Leakey was director of the Kenya Wildlife Service until 1999 
