In a few hours one of them will be leaving for Valencia, the other for the province of Huelva, in Andalusia. An acquaintance, who has been in Spain for two years, told them they might find work on farms there. It will be the last stage of a five-year journey they made together, from the poverty-stricken cotton fields of Mali to the European mainland, with a detour by boat from the coast of Western Sahara to Fuerteventura, in the Canary Islands.

Mady Tounkara, 25, and Yaouba Kone, 26, both come from villages near Kayes, in southwest Mali. Their families grow cotton and everyone lends a hand - there are 10 children in the Tounkara family and 15 in Kone's. In an area where cotton is the only crop, fetching $0.40 a kilo, they cannot make ends meet. There is certainly not enough cash for all the children to get married. Of the Tounkara siblings, three of whom are older than Mady, only two have been able to start a family. When the rain failed and the crop was poor, Mady and Yaouba made their separate ways to the capital, Bamako, in search of work, hoping to earn enough to buy food for the whole family. It was there that they met and decided to emigrate to Europe. 

'A lot of young people in Mali are considering emigration,' says Mady. 'We started out on May 15, 2001. I had 100,000 CFA francs ($180),' recalls Yaouba. It was of course nowhere near enough to pay for the journey to Europe. So the two men took the northern road, hoping to earn some more on the way. They worked in the fields of the Djanet oasis, in southeast Algeria, then returned to Mali. Then they tried Libya. From there they went to Morocco, stopping in Rabat and Casablanca, finally ending up in El-Aaiun, the capital of Western Sahara, in March. Remarkably they managed to save some money during their five-year odyssey. 

'I earned $1,800 in Algeria and Libya,' says Yaouba. They had enough money to persuade a Moroccan in El-Aaiun to sell them two seats on a boat that was about to leave. 'We paid $1,300 each. Apart from the skipper, there were 34 of us on board and we all paid the same,' says Yaouba. Just before they embarked, the smuggler made them strip, searching each garment for mobile phones and hidden cash. 'He felt everything, even the seams of our clothes,' says Mady. 'He found the $180 I had stashed in the heel of one of my shoes and the collar of my shirt.' For good measure the smuggler confiscated their clothes and shoes, leaving them a pair of trousers and a T-shirt to protect them from the ocean wind. 

After an 11-hour crossing, with just a compass to guide them, they reached Fuerteventura, the Canary island nearest to the African mainland and most closely guarded. The Spanish coastguards picked up the 34 passengers and ferried them to dry land, handing them over to the Red Cross, which gave them a check-up, a change of clothes and food. 

Within 72 hours a court issued a deportation order. However, the authorities generally cannot enforce such orders, since migrants rarely carry identity papers. While they awaited what they thought was their deportation, Mady and Yaouba were taken into custody by the local police (migrants may be held for up to 40 days). 'We were well treated,' they say. Then, on May 18, the police took the two men to the island's airport and put them on a plane. 'We had no idea where we were going,' they recall. When the number of migrants reaching the Canary Islands started to rise, in 2000, the Spanish authorities started transferring those not deported - the vast majority - to various parts of mainland Spain, particularly Madrid, Catalonia and Valencia. Mady and Yaouba were flown to Madrid and handed over to the Red Cross. 

'When they first arrive,' says Nuria Baz, the head of the organisation's immigration programme, 'we interview them to find out what they need. If they know someone, as is generally the case, we do our best to put them in contact. We give them meals, teach them Spanish, sometimes even how to read and write. We also help them find their way around. If necessary, we can put them up for three months. The priority is to make them self-sufficient.' In 2005, the Madrid branch of the Red Cross handled 1,572 migrants from sub-Saharan Africa. Without official papers Mady and Yaouba cannot work legally, but they are free. In a few hours they will be going their separate ways, eager to get on with their lives. As a parting gift the Red Cross gave them EUR60 each.

More than 7,500 sub-Saharan Africans have been intercepted off the Canary Islands since January, prompting the Spanish prime minister, Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, to ask Europe and the African countries from which the migrants come, to shoulder their share of the burden. 

Brussels is responding by dispatching more patrol boats and planes to monitor the waters off the Canary Islands, while European funds will help the construction of two temporary reception centres for deported migrants, in Mauritania and Senegal. Meanwhile Mr Zapatero has sent his secretary of state for foreign affairs on a tour of eight African countries to encourage them to sign a readmission agreement for illegal immigrants. 

