They really rubbed it in. Not only did they leave a handwritten note that said, "Thank you officer for the tools needed. You're a real pal! Happy holidays." They also signed it with a smiley face. The note was a going-away card from two prisoners in a New Jersey jail who on Saturday broke out of a high-security wing armed only with a thick metal wire and a metal wheel used to turn off water pipes. The audacious breakout appeared to combine an intimate knowledge of Hollywood prison films, an ability to wriggle through small holes worthy of Houdini and a talent for parkour, the urban hobby of leaping off high buildings.

Police were still searching last night for Jose Espinosa, 20, and Otis Blunt, 32, as details emerged about how they pulled off the escape from Union County jail. They began by using the wire to scratch away the cement around a concrete block in the adjoining wall between their two cells, B310 and B311. By removing the block, Blunt managed to squeeze his 1.79-metre (5ft 9in) (11?st) frame through a 20cm by 40cm hole into Espinosa's cell. From there, Espinosa, who is 1.67 metres tall (5ft 5in) and 10st 10lb, and Blunt both wriggled out of a similar hole that had been opened by removing a block separating Espinosa's cell from the outside world.

Investigators found that the men had disguised the holes by using the heavy metal wheel to crush up the rubble and hide it in plastic boxes used to store their personal possessions. They had then, in an apparent movie homage, placed posters of women in bikinis over the holes.

A local prosecutor, Ted Romankow expressed his displeasure about the Hollywood connection. "I think this is a very serious situation," he admonished reporters at a press conference. "I really prefer not to compare with any movie, although I can understand why you might because it does look certainly very similar to some of them." Then, in a complete contradiction of his previous position, he added: "Except in The Shawshank Redemption they had a better poster on the wall."

From the world of Tim Robbins, the inmates moved into the realm of Steve McQueen. To put wardens off the scent they padded out their beds with pillows to make dummy sleeping prisoners. Once out of the cell they hurled themselves from a roof 10 metres high. No blood was found, suggesting they landed unscathed.

After that, all they had to do was scale an eight-metre razor-wire fence, which didn't seem to bother them either. Tracks in the snow suggest they parted company and headed in opposite directions along a railway line.

It emerged that this was the second time Blunt had tried to break out using the wire method. The first occasion was nipped in the bud in September after a tip-off from a fellow inmate, and he was moved to what had been assumed to be a more secure part of the prison.

Blunt was being held awaiting trial for robbery and shooting at a corner shop. Espinosa had already pleaded guilty to manslaughter and was awaiting sentencing in which he would have received at least 17 years. He had been the driver in a drive-by shooting in New Jersey in what prosecutors said was a gang feud.

A reward of $8,000 has been offered for the men's recapture, and a full inquiry ordered into prison security.