To Oprah Winfrey, Nelson Mandela and others who gave millions to help South African children orphaned by apartheid-era violence or driven to a life of crime on the streets, the woman who dedicated her life to caring for them was the "Angel of Soweto". To the children she helped she was known simply as Mama Jackie.

Their horrific accounts of seeing parents butchered or resorting to prostitution to feed younger siblings prompted huge donations to Jackie Maarohanye and her Ithuteng Trust school to provide shelter and an education to thousands of traumatised and destitute children. The money came from famous donors such as Winfrey, who wrote a cheque for $1m during a visit to the school last year, as well as corporate sponsors including the US National Basketball Association. "I think Mama Jackie is a living angel on earth," said Winfrey. 

But now the school's gates are bolted and America's most influential talk show host, along with Mr Mandela and Bill Clinton, have requested copies of a South African television documentary that claims Ms Maarohanye pressured pupils into reciting fabricated tales of murdered parents, rape and destitution in order to raise money, and that donations to educate children went astray while students went hungry. 

The investigative TV programme Carte Blanche showed that pupils who claimed to have seen their parents killed are living with them, and those supposedly saved from the streets never left home. One of a group of 45 children from the Ithuteng school who travelled to the US five years ago as guests of Bill and Hillary Clinton said they were made to appear before the United Nations and recite false stories of hardship. "We went to the United Nations and [Ms Maarohanye] said that today you better cry seriously ... you better cry more than the other days you have been crying," said the unidentified student. 

Carte Blanche filmed at the school five years ago and went back to talk to some of the same children. Many recanted their original stories. Lebogang Makheta claimed in 2001 that both her parents were murdered in political violence. "My mother was crushed by a spear that cut across her stomach and my father was riddled with bullets," she said at the time. Now Lebogang says that was a lie. 

"I spoke to Mama Jackie and she told me that whatever they ask me, I must say it the way she wrote down because it would help us get sponsors and so forth," she said. "I told myself I was just doing this for the benefits of sponsors and for the benefits of us getting help for scholarships." She also told the programme in 2001 that she was involved with drugs and gangsters. "None of that was true. It was all lies, just lies," she now says. 

Lebogang's mother, Phyllis Makheta, was surprised to discover that her daughter was supposedly an orphan when she attended a fundraising function at the school. "I was there in the school. I don't fully understand English properly, but I did ask them, even Jackie, why these children are crying and saying they are orphans, but we [parents] are here. She said: 'Don't worry, it is a drama.'"

Five years ago Lindiwe Thusi told Carte Blanche that she saw her father's body with his head cut off. She now says: "That was a script we were given from Mama Jackie. "When different people came we had to get ready and started crying and say that whole story," she told Carte Blanche. Lindiwe says her father is alive and serving in the army. She also denied her earlier claims to have worked as a prostitute to feed her sisters and to have been raped by a teacher. 

Ms Maarohanye has refused to comment from her large house in the south of Johannesburg, but she told Carte Blanche that the accusations against her were a "smear campaign" by disgruntled former pupils. However, she was unable to explain how it was that she described to the media Lebogang Makheta's parents as having been murdered or the brutal killing of Lindiwe Thusi's father. She said no student was ever forced to repeat false stories. "I never pushed a child. I have never put a gun on a child's neck. I have never strangled a child. I have never said, if you don't go, this is what I am going to do. I have never done that. You can never prove that I have done that." 

The children's accounts of hardship brought donations pouring in from around the world. Some of the sponsorship was intended to pay college bursaries. But three years ago some donors, including a large bank and a hotel group, broke off dealings with the Ithuteng Trust after discovering the bursaries were not reaching the students or their colleges. Several former Ithuteng students say they were forced to drop out of higher education as a result of the donors suspending payment. A former finance officer at the University of the Western Cape said others were reduced to living on bread for lack of money. Donors started paying the fees direct to ensure that students were able to graduate.

The chairman of the Ithuteng Trust board, Joseph Kganakga, has described the revelations as a nightmare that left him angry and "totally gutted". He has resigned, along with two other board members who said they had lost confidence in Ms Maarohanye.
