Most Zimbabweans who can have left the country in search of a means of survival, or at least made plans to do so. The bulk of those who leave slip into South Africa, posing as tourists and traders. But anywhere that might offer the prospect of a job is a destination: Namibia, Botswana, London. The money these exiles send back to their families in Zimbabwe is staving off the total collapse of an economy subjected to the world's highest inflation rate and starved of hard currency to keep basic services afloat.

Even some of President Robert Mugabe's most trusted allies are warning that his attempts to paint Zimbabwe as thriving and flush with food is a delusion as inflation wipes out the middle class and malnutrition claims the lives of children in what were once some of the country's wealthiest cities. The brutal reality of what the exiles have left behind was laid bare when opposition leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, and others were severely beaten by the police and arrested on their way to a mass protest against the government. The opposition described the beatings as a turning point in the struggle to force Mr Mugabe from power. 

Many ordinary Zimbabweans are not so sure. Their president still looks firmly entrenched to them and popular confidence in the opposition has been weakened over the years since it failed to capitalize on widespread anger when Mr Mugabe stole the 2002 presidential election. Today, in villages such as Mandluntsha, daily life is instead consumed by the struggle to eat and find the money for medicines and to keep the children in school. With it there is a growing fear that diminishing food supplies will soon again be used as a political weapon by Mr Mugabe's Zanu-PF party against his most vulnerable opponents. 

It is not only the poor who rely on money from abroad. Even in some of Zimbabwe's larger cities, such as Bulawayo, a once prosperous middle class has largely been eradicated by the fastest shrinking economy in the world. A couple of years ago the supermarket shelves were bare but the problem today is not so much supply as the cash to afford what is available. 

Felix Mafa, a 60-year-old former college lecturer in Bulawayo, has sold his cars and relies on a son who is a doctor in the US and another who is a shop manager in Namibia to send money to feed the rest of the family. "Instead of being independent I am sustained by my children," he said. "I'm a professional. I had cars and two houses. I sold my cars to pay for my other children to go to school. I gave one of my houses to my eldest son. He is married and cannot afford a bed, let alone a house." 

Mr Mugabe has hailed the violent seizure of white-owned farms that were once crucial to feeding the country, and their redistribution to small-scale black farmers and the ruling party elite, as "completed successfully". He declared that the farmers have produced a "bumper harvest". Zimbabwe's president has also boasted that the economy is being wrestled from foreign control and his finance minister predicted economic growth this year. But the reality was described by Mr Mugabe's ally, the reserve bank governor, Gideon Gono, who told parliament he is struggling to keep electricity on. He said there is no money to keep air force planes in the air, or to put unserviceable police cars back on the road. And 300,000 people are waiting for passports because there is no paper or ink to issue them. Mr Gono warned that inflation could drive Zimbabwe's economy down "to levels never dreamt before". The International Monetary Fund (IMF) predicts that prices could rise by 4,000% this year. 

The reserve bank governor said he received constant pleas from food and petrol distributors, the national airline and the railways for foreign currency that has all but dried up because tobacco exports, once Zimbabwe's biggest source of US dollars, have fallen to a fifth of what they were before the land seizures. The other big earner, tourism, has also collapsed. Mr Gono said the power company warned him: "If you don't give us money the nation will be in darkness." 

But the money is not there and the bank's first priority is to use hard currency to buy maize because famine is looming. Drought and mismanagement has left Zimbabwe with less than half of the maize it needs to feed the country. "If we were talking about local currency, I would say, 'Don't worry, in the next 30 minutes we will print money,'" said Mr Gono. But he said he is not in a position to print American dollars or British pounds.

Zimbabwe's doctors went on strike for weeks because their salaries eroded to the value of seven cans of baked beans a month. They returned to work only after their pay was increased to about GBP110 a month - while two-thirds of the population survives on 60p or less a day. Many hospitals have lost more than half their doctors, and nurses often report to work no more than twice a week because they cannot afford the bus fares. Bulawayo's main hospital, the UBH, has such a shortage of medicines that patients are required to bring their own. "There are patients dying of dehydration for want of a drip," said a doctor. "We can't treat diabetes any more. The nurses are unhappy because there are no gloves when they are handling patients with AIDS."

