It may not make all parents leap for joy but a report published today shows the favourite reading material of young teenagers is Heat magazine. Parents may be more pleased to note that Anne Frank's diary, books by Anthony Horowitz and CS Lewis' The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe are also in the top ten.

The celebrity gossip and news magazine comes top when 11 to 14-year-olds are asked to name their favourite read, followed by teenage girls' magazine Bliss, which comes joint second with reading song lyrics online. They are followed by reading computer game cheats advice online, and then reading your own blog or fan fiction. 

The first books in the list are the Harry Potter series at number five. Proving what a contrary lot teenagers are, Harry Potter is also number eight in the most loathed reading material top ten.
 
The results are contained in a report called Read Up, Fed Up: Exploring Teenage Reading Habits in the UK Today, which was commissioned by organizers of the National Year of Reading, which Gordon Brown launched in January. 

Other books on the favourites list are Anne Frank's diary at number six, Anthony Horowitz novels at eight, the CS Lewis classic at number nine and books by Louise Rennison - author of the Confessions of Georgia Nicolson series - in joint tenth place with BBC Online. 

Honor Wilson-Fletcher, director of the National Year of Reading, said she was more interested in the shape of the list than the rankings. "I think the diversity of the list is really encouraging. I read everything from Jane Austen to Grazia magazine and if you asked adults the same question we've asked teenagers you wouldn't expect James Joyce and Dostoevsky to be there." 

Predictably, the most loathed read is homework. It is followed by Shakespeare, books of over 100 pages and stories about skinny celebrities in magazines ? although the cover and pages six to 12 of this week's favourite read Heat are devoted to the subject. 

Evidence that the Facebook phenomenon may be over is perhaps reflected by it being the ninth most hated read, although the report shows a big rise in online reading. 

It also reveals that 45% of young teenagers have been told off by parents for reading something considered improper. Wilson-Fletcher said: "One of the fundamental problems we've got is that we end up being pejorative about certain kinds of reading. Parents should realize reading is not just about books." 

She said the amount of online reading should be celebrated. "Young people are web natives ? exposed to a wider variety of reading material than any previous generation through the explosion of digital media. It seems not all adults are comfortable with this shift and are often discouraging teens from taking advantage of this new reading landscape." 

The schools minister, Jim Knight, said: "It is vital that young people have the opportunity to read widely. It is wonderful that 80% of the teenagers surveyed write their own stories and keep up-to-date with current affairs by using sites like BBC Online."

Also revealed is a gender divide. Among boys, 41% listed online computer game cheats as their favourite read, while online song lyrics came second. Nearly a third of boys said they loved reading because it helped them get better at hobbies. Girls took a different approach, with 39% saying they loved reading because it provided an escape, or quiet time to enjoy on their own. 

The survey was compiled by using focus groups from which the 20 most loved and 20 most loathed reads were assembled. From this, a 'national conversation about reading' was launched, with teenagers logging on to the teen website Pizco to have their say. A total of 1,340 teenagers were surveyed.

