The remaining international aid agencies in Iraq were considering pulling out after the kidnapping of four humanitarian workers, including two Italian women, from their headquarters in Baghdad, it was claimed recently. Jean-Dominique Bunel, a coordinator for the agencies, said the abduction last week had already prompted some aid workers to leave and others would follow soon. 

Speaking to Agence France-Presse, he said: "It seems that most of the international non-governmental organisations are preparing to leave Iraq and some expatriate [staff] already left ... More will follow in coming days." Mr Bunel said he had no idea who had abducted the Italians, who work for Bridge to Baghdad, an organisation helping children across the country. 

An Iraqi group called Ansar al-Zawahri said it had kidnapped the women. In a message on an Islamist website, it claimed: "This is the first of our attacks against Italy." The name, Partisans of Zawahri, appears to refer to Osama bin Laden's right-hand man, Ayman al-Zawahri. Almost all major aid organisations have left Iraq because of the deteriorating security situation, including the UN, the International Red Cross and Medecins sans Frontieres. Those that have stayed have had to reassess the situation because of the nature of the latest kidnapping, which involved 20 gunmen bursting into the organisation's office in central Baghdad. It marked a change in strategy by hostage-takers, who have not targeted aid workers or women, except for one Japanese woman. 

In Italy the prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, called on leftwing opposition leaders to stand with the right in the crisis. He was said to be "aghast and flabbergasted" that women were being harmed because "Islam teaches that they are sacred". Opposition leaders repeated their hostility to the war in Iraq and Italy's military presence there, but said the priority was to save the hostages. The deputy prime minister, Gianfranco Fini, said the kidnapping showed that "terrorists had made a quantum leap in their strategy". 

The kidnapping came 10 days after the murder of the Italian journalist Enzo Baldoni, kidnapped while travelling to Najaf with the Italian Red Cross. Italy had rejected kidnappers' demands for its troops to quit Iraq. Another militant group released a video of a Turkish hostage having his head cut off. In the tape from Tawhid and Jihad, a group inconclusively linked to the Jordanian al-Qaida militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Durmus Kumdereli, a driver, said he had been captured while delivering goods to a US base in Mosul. He urged other transport companies and drivers "not to aid the occupiers". Masked men then beheaded him. 

The Australian prime minister, John Howard, said he would not withdraw troops from Iraq as demanded by militants who claimed to have taken two Australians hostage. 



