Osama bin Laden marks his 50th birthday today, probably in a hideout in the tribal lands between Pakistan and Afghanistan. It's tempting to imagine the grey-bearded jihadi hunched over a cake with burning candles inside a cave, smiling henchmen gathered behind him. In reality it's not likely to be much of a party. Birthday parties are frowned upon by Wahhabi puritans such as the al-Qaida leader, who consider such celebrations a vulgar western import. But as he passes another milestone, he at least has reason to enjoy a quiet smile.

Six years after 9/11, bin Laden is maddeningly out of reach. Despite the world's largest manhunt and a $25m bounty, he remains at large, the Scarlet Pimpernel of jihad. A powerful myth has grown around him - the tall, stern-faced Saudi-born militant has become the ghost of the Hindu Kush, variously reported dead or alive at different points inside the epic mountain range. The Pakistani army thought it had him cornered in a village in the lawless North Waziristan tribal agency in 2003. A year later the Spanish newspaper El Mundo claimed to have located him inside a Muslim enclave of western China. After the mammoth earthquake that devastated northern Pakistan, Senator Harry Reid from Nevada announced that bin Laden had died under the rubble. 

At about the same time a discreet team of American investigators arrived in Chitral, a quiet mountain retreat to the north, where they believed they had picked up the trail. Shortly afterwards angry local clerics blew their cover and they left. 

Bin Laden's kidney problems have been the subject of intense speculation. Some watchers claim he is dependent on dialysis; others say this is nonsense. Last September a French newspaper reported he had died of typhoid in the tribal belt. 

America's spies are convinced OBL, as they call him, is hiding in Pakistan's tribal belt. "To the best of our knowledge the senior leadership, number one and two, are there," said Admiral Mike McConnell, the new director of national intelligence, last week. Based on this the CIA is sending fresh operatives to trap him, ABC News reported last Tuesday. 

But if the Americans think he is in the border areas, the tribesmen who live there think the opposite. Across the border in Afghanistan the belief that bin Laden has already been caught by America - and is even hidden inside the White House - is remarkably common. "Many, many people believe such stories," said Sarah Chayes, a writer who lives in Kandahar. If America really has such strong soldiers and powerful satellites, they conclude, bin Laden must already be in 
the bag. 

Most Afghans have little time for the man who sparked an invasion of their country in 2001. Nine out of 10 people view him negatively, according to a recent poll. But elsewhere in the Muslim world he is a man to be greatly admired. "Osama is a hero," said Kamran Ali, a 23-year-old call centre operator in Islamabad. "Americans have done many bad things against Muslims. Osama stands up to them." Like many Pakistanis he discounted suggestions that Bin Laden was linked to the World Trade Centre attacks. "There's no proof of that," he said. 

That sentiment is echoed across the Muslim world, said Abdel Bari Atwan, editor of the London-based al-Quds al-Arabi newspaper. But, he stressed, support for bin Laden does not equate to a vote for terrorism. "When people in Palestine voted for Hamas it was not for radicalism, they voted against corruption. 

This is the same. Because people hate American foreign policy and corrupt Arab dictatorships they sympathize with al-Qaida and Osama bin Laden. It doesn't mean they approve of al-Qaida's actions or September 11," he said.
 
Could bin Laden be dead? Mullah Dadullah, a Taliban commander with a reputation for ruthlessness, claims to be in touch. "We exchange messages to share plans," he said in one of two recent interviews. "It's very hard for anyone to see bin Laden himself now but we know he's still alive. He's not yet martyred." The Emir, as bin Laden is known to followers, is becoming increasingly bold. As-Sahab, the al-Qaida video production house, released more than 20 audio and videotapes from bin Laden and his number two, Ayman al-Zawahiri, in 2006. 

The messages are often long-winded and convoluted. Most of the time bin Laden employs silence much more effectively, said Michael Scheuer, former head of the CIA's bin Laden unit. "It suggests they are ready to attack again. It is a tremendously powerful and sophisticated approach," he said. Meanwhile, in the mountain forests and remote valleys of the tribal belt, the hunt continues.
