The former deputy prime minister of the United Kingdom, John Prescott, has been praised by medical experts for his 'brave' admission that he struggled with the eating disorder bulimia for two decades. In his forthcoming autobiography, Prescott reveals that the stress of political life led him to seek comfort in food and then force himself to throw up. He says he began suffering from bulimia in the 1980s, when the pressure of being in the Labour shadow cabinet became overwhelming. He battled the condition throughout his time in government, gorging on burgers, chocolate, crisps and fish and chips. But he now says he has been free of the problem for more than a year.

"I'm sure it was to do with stress," he wrote in the Sunday Times, which is to serialize his memoirs. "I wasn't doing it all the time, and there would be gaps of weeks and months, but during those years when we first got into power, I let things get on top of me and took refuge in stuffing my face." He added: "I've never confessed it before. Out of shame, I suppose, or embarrassment ? or just because it's such a strange thing for someone like me to confess to. People normally associate it with young women ? anorexic girls, models trying to keep their weight down, or women in stressful situations, like Princess Diana." 

He also revealed how he would turn to sweet things and Chinese food when things became stressful. "I could drink a whole tin of condensed milk, just for the taste, stupid things like that. I still love trifles; they're one of my favourites. I can eat them forever. Whenever I go to Mr Chu's in Hull, my favourite Chinese restaurant in the whole world ... I could eat my way through the entire menu."

Although Prescott tried to hide the illness from his wife, she realized what was going on. "The signs in the toilet gave it away, and all the missing food." She urged him to see a doctor and a consultant eventually diagnosed him with bulimia. "I turned up and found his waiting room full of young women. I was the only man there. I felt a right twerp. Luckily none of them shopped me to the press." In the book, he also reveals that, despite preferring food to alcohol, he would occasionally drink to relieve the stress and to let people know how low he was feeling.

"Once or twice a year, when I was absolutely knackered, I did get out a bottle of vodka and place it on my desk. The office hated it when they saw what was happening. They knew I'd go at it full pelt, as I always do with anything, and empty the bottle. But that was very rare." Prescott, who resigned as deputy prime minister last June and will retire as an MP at the next election, is now supporting a National Health Service campaign to raise awareness of eating disorders. 

The eating disorder support charity Beat said Prescott's decision to speak out had shown considerable courage. "It will help other people to realize that men can be affected by eating disorders, and you can get help and treatment ? even if you have been ill for a very long time," said the charity's chief executive, Susan Ringwood. "It is a brave thing to do because people do feel ashamed of themselves and find it really hard even to tell close family members." 

Although girls and young women aged between 12 and 20 account for 80% of new cases of eating disorders, boys and men are also affected. "It is probably under-diagnosed ? even a doctor doesn't necessarily think it can affect a boy or a man," said Ringwood. "Anybody could have this condition, including people who are in the public eye," she said. "People absolutely shouldn't be ashamed. We need to get past that huge stigma that is associated with an eating disorder." 

Dr Ty Glover, a consultant psychiatrist and expert on eating disorders, described Prescott's revelation as "a hugely brave and courageous thing". He added: "It's hard enough for a young girl to confess to, but for a high-profile male politician approaching 70, it's especially impressive." Glover said he had never before come across a man of Prescott's age with bulimia. "It seriously makes me think that maybe we're completely missing a whole audience of middle-aged men who are too scared to admit they have a problem. "John's bravery will hopefully encourage more men to stop suffering in silence and come forward to seek treatment."

There are thought to be more than one million people in Britain with an eating disorder such as bulimia or anorexia, 90% of whom are women.

