Surrounded by white-robed Orthodox bishops, his grieving family, Vladimir Putin and his successor, Boris Nikolayevich, Yeltsin was buried yesterday in the tranquil surroundings of Moscow's Novodevichy cemetery. It was perhaps appropriate that the man who once promised Russians an economic miracle - but spectacularly failed to deliver it ? was laid to rest next door to Igor Kio, Russia's most celebrated illusionist. His neighbour on the other side is Yevgeny Urbansky, an actor.
 
Before Yeltsin's coffin was covered and lowered into the ground, his widow, Naina, came forward to say farewell. She smoothed back his grey hair and kissed him fondly several times on the lips and cheeks. Russia's national anthem sounded and Yeltsin sank into his final resting place. Looking on were several ex-world leaders, including Bill Clinton and George Bush Snr. Also there were Sir John Major, the Duke of York and the Polish Solidarity leader Lech Walesa. 

During his lifetime Yeltsin, who died on Monday of heart failure at the age of 76, presided over a series of momentous changes - the end of the cold war, the collapse of the Soviet empire and a period of chaos and liberty. Yesterday's state funeral marked another departure: a conscious return to Russia's old pre-revolutionary traditions. It was the first time since 1894 and the death of Tsar Alexander III that Russia's Orthodox church had sanctioned a ceremony for a Russian head of state. 

Since Soviet times, and Lenin's memorably freezing funeral in January 1924, all Russian leaders with the exception of Khrushchev have been buried near the Kremlin Wall and mourners have proceeded across Red Square. Yesterday's low-key ceremony took place in the cathedral of Christ the Saviour ? a vast gold-domed church not far from the Kremlin. It was blown up by Stalin in 1931 but rebuilt during Yeltsin's presidency as a symbol of national revival.
 
Hundreds of mourners had queued round the block to pay their respects to Yeltsin, who had lain in state for two days. His open coffin was draped in a Russian tricolour. Mourners went past in solemn file, laying carnations and red roses. "He was a muzhik - a strong man," Dmitry Samarin, who spent 16 years as Yeltsin's bodyguard, told the Guardian outside the church. Was he a good leader, though? "History is a very difficult thing," he replied carefully. "He managed to defeat the communist leadership. I doubt anybody else could have done it." 

Arytom Leonidovich, a 26-year-old architect, said it was a complicated question. "I think in time history will record that he did more positive than negative things. The fall of the communist regime was largely down to him. "He also had many human qualities. He was compassionate, unlike the leadership we've got now."
 
State television yesterday paid lavish tribute. Flags were flown at half-mast. But many ordinary Russians clearly still regard Yeltsin's seven and a half years as president as a disaster. There were few mourners along the funeral route. The country has been split over its assessment of his legacy. Some praise him for bringing freedom and helping defeat a coup attempt by former Soviet hardliners; others blame him for handing over state assets to oligarchs and damaging the country's name with his drunken behaviour. 

Yesterday's TV coverage made little mention of his disastrous decision to go to war against Chechen rebels in 1994. Instead it concentrated on the good bits - Yeltsin's friendly rapport with ordinary Russians and his obvious devotion towards his children and grandchildren. Communist MPs, however, refused to stand for a moment of silence in Yeltsin's memory in parliament yesterday. "We will never give honour to the destroyer of the fatherland," communist MP Viktor Ilyukhin said. 

Other old foes were more magnanimous. In a moment of reconciliation, former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev ? a longstanding rival left without a job when Yeltsin dismantled the Soviet Union - kissed his widow and whispered words of condolence. Sir John Major and Mr Clinton gave her a hug. Mr Putin and his wife, Ludmilla, stood solemnly nearby. Every member of Russia's cabinet was there, including Sergei Ivanov and Dmitry Medvedev, the two men likely to contest next year's presidential election. Also there was Roman Abramovich, an oligarch whose billion-dollar fortune was accumulated during Yeltsin's rule. 

At the service, bearded priests swung incense and sang passages from the gospels. They prayed for Yeltsin's sins. Metropolitan Yuvenaly, the second most senior cleric in the Orthodox church, told mourners Yeltsin had given people the freedom they sought. Russia's first president should be remembered for this, he said. "Russia today lives a full life and is returning to its historic traditions. Witness to that is the fact that for the first time in 100 years we are bidding farewell to a Russian head of state in a church with prayers."
