Ian Paisley and Gerry Adams sat side by side yesterday to announce they had reached agreement to share power from May 8 in a devolved Northern Ireland government. The appearance together of arch-enemies - delegations from the Democratic Unionist Party and Sinn Fein - in a televised statement at the end of a meeting in Stormont constitutes a watershed in the province's politics. The private negotiating session, lasting little more than an hour, was the first time the two parties had held direct talks. It enabled both sides to issue statements pledging political cooperation and the start of a new and peaceful era.

The accord between the veteran unionist firebrand and the leader of a militant republican movement that once killed opponents was welcomed in London and Dublin as the defining moment in 10 years of a protracted peace process. Emergency legislation will be introduced in the British parliament today to enable a smooth transition. The devolved government should be operating before Tony Blair leaves Downing Street. 

The meeting had been arranged to discuss the DUP's reluctance to enter a power-sharing executive before the deadline of midnight yesterday. DUP politicians said they needed more time for Sinn Fein to validate its commitment to supporting the police. The six-week deferment will also help DUP members adjust to change. 

The agreement came in the first-floor members' dining room at Stormont. The atmosphere was described as "cordial" and "constructive". The Sinn Fein leader wore an Easter lily badge, commemorating those who died in the 1916 uprising. There was no handshake. 

"In the past," Mr Paisley declared, "the government has set arbitrary deadlines but now ... we as a party have agreed the timing, setting up and working of the institutions. We have agreed with Sinn Fein that this date will be Tuesday May 8 ... After a long and difficult time in the province I believe that enormous opportunities lie ahead ... I want to make it clear that I am committed to delivering not only for those who voted for the DUP but for all the people of Northern Ireland. We must not allow our justified loathing of the horrors and tragedies of the past to become a barrier to creating a better and more stable future. In looking to that future we must never forget those who have suffered during the dark period from which we are, please God, emerging."
 
Mr Adams welcomed the DUP's commitment: "While it is disappointing that the institutions of the Good Friday agreement have not been restored today, I believe the agreement reached between Sinn Fein and the DUP ... marks the beginning of a new era of politics on this island ... The relationships between the people of this island have been marred by centuries of discord, conflict, hurt and tragedy ... We have all come a very long way in the process of peace making and national reconciliation. We are very conscious of the many people who have suffered. We owe it to them to build the best future possible. It is a time for generosity, a time to be mindful of the common good and of the future of all our people." 

Both parties will go together to the chancellor, Gordon Brown, in the coming weeks to seek a larger financial package for the province. Mr Paisley said the parties said they would engage in preparatory work ahead of May 8 to ensure "local ministers hit the ground running". In case the significance of the moment had escaped notice, the DUP leader emerged from the meeting grinning broadly and shouted to journalists waiting below in the great hall at Stormont: "Do you have eyes in your head?"

In London the prime minister said: "In a sense, everything that we've done over the last 10 years has been a preparation for this moment. This won't stop republicans or nationalists being any less republican or nationalist, or making unionists any less fiercely unionist. But what it does mean is that people can come together, respecting each other's point of view, and share power, making sure politics is only expressed by peaceful and democratic means.
