The most comprehensive survey of female MPs ever conducted has revealed the reactionary attitudes to women held by many MPs in the British Parliament. Based on interviews with 83 current and recent MPs, it contains some frank comments about certain male MPs making sexist remarks and gestures as women try to speak in the Commons.

The study, Whose Secretary Are You, Minister? was overseen by Professor Joni Lovenduski of Birkbeck College, London, and Margaret Moran MP. They gathered more than 100 hours of taped interviews, to be placed in the British Library. 

When Gillian Shephard arrived in the House of Commons as a new Tory MP in 1987 she was confused to find herself and her fellow women MPs being called Betty. "There was a Conservative MP who called us all Betty," she recalls, "and when I said, 'Look, you know my name isn't Betty', he said, 'Ah, but you're all the same, so I call you all Betty, it's easier'." 

Barbara Follett says: "I remember some Conservatives whenever a Labour woman got up to speak taking their breasts - their imaginary breasts - in their hands and wiggle them and say 'melons' as we spoke." When scores of female MPs - 120 in all - arrived in the Commons in 1997, Labour's Claire Curtis-Thomas assumed that the red ribbons tied to coat hangers were for Aids day, only to be told they were for members to hang up their swords. 

Another new MP, Yvette Cooper, found it hard to persuade Commons officials that she was not a researcher or secretary. Jackie Ballard, a Liberal Democrat who left parliament at the last election, cites a leading Tory MP who kept up a stream of remarks just out of hearing of the Speaker, "maybe about someone's legs or someone being a lesbian ... if he worked for me he'd probably be sacked". The same MP is reported as announcing, while drunk in the chamber, that he'd like to "make love to" a nearby woman. 

The interviews show how even after the arrival of the "Blair babes", female MPs were expected to stick to "women's issues", such as health and education. Several complain of the put-downs they experienced when stepping on to traditionally male territory. When Labour's Dari Taylor resigned from the defence select committee - one of only two women on it - the chairman, Bruce George, stood up and said: "Well, I have to make this announcement: one down, one to go." 

The hostility from some male MPs was astonishing. Even those who publicly espoused equality were furious to see women getting promotion. One current member of the cabinet was asked, when she was promoted: "Oh, you've had a very fast rise, who have you been sleeping with?" Male MPs and officials seemed reluctant to accept the new Labour women, many of them in their 30s and 40s. Some simply could not believe that youngish women could be members of parliament. 

Many female MPs say the introduction of "family friendly" hours have improved things, undermining the old male drinking culture. But it isn't perfect yet. Sarah Teather, the new Liberal Democrat MP, says: "Lots of people say it's like an old boys' club. I've always said, to me it feels rather more like a teenage public school* -- you know, a public school full of teenage boys." 

Worse than all the sexism and the mockery, women MPs are angry that their achievements are not recognised. They insist that they have brought a new feminised agenda to Westminster politics, in particular, the rise of childcare to the top of the domestic agenda. Many other policies are cited too. Marion Roe, a Tory MP, is proud of her bill outlawing female circumcision in 1985 -- "when I did that, nobody knew what female circumcision was". Ruth Kelly cites parental leave, while Teresa Gorman says bluntly: "I put menopause on the map." 

* Note: In the UK, so-called 'public' schools are not public at all. They are private schools for the children of rich parents.
