Britain's fur trade is enjoying its strongest growth for 20 years, suggesting a dramatic softening of public attitudes towards wearing animal skins. Widespread hostility to wearing fur in the 1990s made it fashion's biggest taboo for most image-conscious consumers. Yet new industry figures have revealed that sales rose 35% in the UK last year - the biggest single increase since the early 80s. 

Demand has been so acute that some furriers have already sold out of stock, weeks before the Christmas shopping reaches its peak. In London fur has not been so highly visible on the high street for 20 years. Even last month's gripping image of pop singer Sophie Ellis Bextor clutching a skinned fox to register her disgust at the trade will fail to quash fur's resurgence, according to retailers. They believe that its sudden popularity is partly fuelled by a new generation of consumers who are rebelling against the anti-fur movement and the political correctness of the 90s. 

The heavy promotion of mink and fox by leading fashion houses is also credited with bolstering its appeal: fur has registered 300 appearances on the 
catwalks so far this year. Celebrities such as Jennifer Lopez, Madonna, P Diddy, and the model Kate Moss are among those who have offered fur the celebrity badge of approval. This is a far cry from the days when fur-coat wearers risked being spattered with paint in public while the world's supermodels declared they would "rather go naked" than wear animal skins. 

Fashion historian Judith Watt, who specialises in the history of fur, believes that is the twenty and thirty-something women who have opened up a new market for fur. "A generation that grew up as children of the anti-fur movement are now rebelling against it", she says. "They are bored with being politically correct. It doesn't mean they haven't got a conscience; they just want to make up their own minds. 

At the height of the successful protests from the anti-fur lobby in the mid-90s, an estimated 90% of shops were forced to close. Yet despite fur's growing acceptance, the decision of 23-year-old Bextor to pose for the animal welfare charity People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (Peta), indicates that hostility towards thetrade remains. Following the publication of her clutching the bloody remnants of a fox last month, Peta received more than 50,000 hits on its website within three days. The organisation accused the fur trade of widespread cruelty, claiming that just one coat can require killing as many as 50 animals by various means, including electrocution, poisoning or gassing. "What the fur industry wants to hide is the cruelty; Sophie's picture brings home the reality," says Dawn Carr, who is the director of Peta. "Cruelty is never going to be back in fashion." 

Last month the organisation was also in the limelight when a group of Peta activists targeted the fur industry's latest high-profile recruit, the supermodel Gisele Bundchen, at a New York fashion show. They were furious over Bundchen's decision to spearhead an advertising campaign for leading US fur company Blackglama in exchange for a reported $500,000 and two black mink coats. 

