It has no radio, no boot, no airbag, no passenger-side mirror and just one long windscreen wiper. And if you want air-conditioning to deal with India's summer heat, you'll have to buy the deluxe version. India's Tata Group has unveiled the world's cheapest car, the Nano, which goes on sale later this year with a price tag of 100,000 rupees (GBP1,260) to bring motoring to the country's billion-strong masses. For 70-year-old Ratan Tata, the group's chairman, the launch of the Nano is a landmark in transport, comparable to the first powered flight by the Wright brothers, or the first moonshot. But environmentalists say the new car could bring about a 'nightmare' of choking pollution and clogged roads.

Like a modern-day version of Henry Ford, Tata's idea is of an affordable car that is light and simple, yet made from high-quality materials. The result is a jelly bean-shaped vehicle into which five adults can squeeze. The basic model makes no concession to luxury: its price has been kept low by using more plastic than steel, and swapping hi-tech glue for traditional welding. Rival manufacturers had questioned whether the car would meet safety standards, especially if the company plans to export such models to Europe, which requires cars to meet stringent crash tests. Tata officials said the car had been designed so it could be easily strengthened with metal plates to meet tougher safety standards.

Conceived four years ago, the Nano has already revolutionized the motor industry. Days before Tata unveiled the car, Ford announced it would increase spending by $500m (GBP250m) a year to make India a hub for 'small-car manufacturing'. Last October, Renault said it was considering making a $5,000 car in India for export to the US. For now Tata remains focused on India, which analysts predict will become the fastest growing car market ? overtaking China ? in five years.

The 'people's car' is also a realization of the Tata chairman's dream: to put every Indian family behind a steering wheel. He says the thought came to him first while watching families on motorbikes travelling through dusty streets. "The father driving the scooter, his young kid standing in front of him, his wife seated behind him holding a baby. It led me to wonder whether one could conceive of a safe, affordable, all-weather form of transport for such a family."

At just 100,000 rupees, excluding sales tax, the Nano is less than half the price of the next cheapest car on the road in India and a bit more than an upmarket motorcycle. Analysts say that amid an economic boom there is a latent demand from increasingly affluent Indians trading up from a 'two-wheeler' to a car. If just 10% of motorcycle owners switched to Tata's Nano, it would mean 1m extra cars on India's roads a year.

"Tata have been very smart and have studied the market very carefully," said Abdul Majeed, a partner in the automotive division of PricewaterhouseCoopers. "Like Ford's Model T, which drove the American motor boom in the early 20th century, Tata will give the Indian consumer a tough, easy to drive, cheap to maintain and, most of all, affordable car. The market possibilities are huge."

But environmentalists say the possibility of mass sales of the Nano has worrying implications for the environment. Major cities in India are now wreathed in smog and rush hours have spread long into the night. In Delhi traffic now crawls, on average, at less than nine miles an hour ? half that a decade ago. As congestion builds up and cars slow, greenhouse gases emissions increase more rapidly. India's vehicles spewed 219m tonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere in 2005. Experts say that figure will jump almost seven-fold to 1,470 tonnes by 2035 if car travel remains unchecked.

"In terms of emission standards we are five to 10 years behind Europe. We do not tax diesel properly and hence subsidize more dirty car use," said Sunita Narain of Delhi's Centre for Science and Environment. "We need public transport to ensure mobility, not policies that promote private cars, otherwise we will meet people's aspirations, but not their needs."

The motor lobby insists that Indian car ownership is minuscule in per capita terms: seven or eight out of every 1,000 people, compared with more than 500 in America. The number of private cars in India ? about 13m ? is only a little more than half the number of cars in America at the onset of the Great Depression of the 1930s. India's mass motoring boom is already reshaping the country. Slowly cities are giving way to wide-flung suburbs. The government is spending GBP35bn on new road projects. Farmland has been handed over to industry for the factories to build new cars.

In the case of Tata's new car, more than 1,000 acres of luxuriantly fertile fields in West Bengal's Singur district were acquired to set up the Nano plant. The factory will be able to churn out 250,000 cars a year. Thousands of farmers who once raised four crops a year have been evicted to make way for the new facility. Last month Shankar Patra, a 50-year-old farmer who saw his fields turned over to the Tata plant, killed himself. "Without our fields there is no work for us. The village will die," said Patra's 22-year-old son, Pratap. "We have nothing, but the rest of India will have a new car."

