
	Cell division occurs to reproduce and replace cells.  The division of cells with a membrane-bound nucleus and organelles (eucaryotic cells) involves two distinct but overlapping stages, mitosis and cytokinesis.  Mitosis occurs to replicate the cell's genetic material in the nucleus, whereas cytokinesis occurs to divide the gel-like liquid surrounding the cell's nucleus, called cytoplasm.  Mitosis includes four phases which will be described here.  Cytokinesis begins during the last of the four phases. 



	In the first stage of cell division, mitosis, one complete set of chromosomes goes to each new cell, which are called daughter cells.  Mitosis guarantees that all of the genetic information from chromosomes in the nuclear DNA of the parent cell will go to each new daughter cell. 
	There are four distinct phases of mitosis called prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.  These four phases are well known because it is possible to observe them with the simple light microscope.

	The first phase of mitosis is called prophase.  Pro- means ìbeforeî, hence this phase takes place before the other three phases.  During prophase, invisible, threadlike DNA fibers of the nucleus, which are called chromatin, condense and double into two chromosomes, each unit of which is called a chromatid.  Each pair of chromatids is attached at one place, like Siamese twins, to form a single chromosome.  The place where these chromatids are attached is called the centromere.  In the human cell there are 92 chromatids, which result from the replication of 46 chromosomes.

	Soon after the chromatin material has condensed into doubled chromosomes, centrioles begin to migrate away from each other.  Centrioles are two small structures located outside the cell's nucleus that help to produce a spindle which later divides the chromosomes between the two daughter cells.  In cells with centrioles (which include all animal cells), the two centrioles move to opposite ends of the cell.  Threadlike filaments, called asters, then develop around each centriole and radiate in all directions, resembling a flower.  During later prophase, many of the filaments between the two centrioles lengthen and connect with each other.  This network of filaments is called the spindle.  Late in prophase some filaments of the spindle become attached to the kinetochores, which are protein structures located within the centromere of the chromatids.  In human cells, prophase lasts from 30 to 60 seconds.

	The second phase of mitosis is called metaphase because meta- means ìmidî.  During metaphase the chromatids become aligned at the midregion, or equator, of the cell.  At this time the centrioles, if present, are at opposite ends of the cell, which are called the poles.  Also during metaphase, the formation of the spindle between the two centrioles is completed.  Metaphase in human cells requires from two to six minutes.

	At the beginning of the third phase of mitosis called anaphase (ana- means ìawayî), the kinetochores all divide at one time.  This division causes the chromatids to separate into daughter chromosomes.  The daughter chromosomes then move equally to each cell pole, which is why this is called the "away" phase.

	The fourth stage of mitosis is called telophase, because telo- means ìendî, and it begins when all the daughter chromosomes reach the two cell poles.  During telophase the spindle that was completed in metaphase begins to disappear.  Later, the nuclear membrane reappears and encloses the two groups of chromosomes at the two poles.  While this is happening, the chromosomes begin to disappear and turn back into threadlike chromatin material, or DNA, which spreads throughout the nucleus.  Cytokinesis, the division of the cytoplasm, also begins during telophase.  Telophase in humans is quite variable, requiring from 30 to 60 minutes.

	Cytokinesis, the second stage of cell division, begins to occur before mitosis is complete (usually during telophase) and continues after the nuclei of the daughter cells are completely formed.  The preliminary steps of cytokinesis occur during the growth interphases of the cell cycle.  In the growth phases, various membrane structures and organelles, such as the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi bodies, are produced out of components in the cytoplasm.  During the growth phases there is also reproduction of the mitochondria and chloroplasts.  These organelles contain their own DNA, called organelle DNA, and the organelles' reproduction includes the replication of the organelle DNA.  Therefore, before cytokinesis begins, there is growth in the size of the cytoplasm and in the number of its organelles.

	During cytokinesis, the cytoplasm and its contents divide.  In animal cells, the cytoplasm divides by pinching inward, whereas in plant cells, a partition, called the cell plate, begins to grow and divide the cytoplasm.  Cytokinesis is not as precise a process as mitosis because the amount of cytoplasm in a daughter cell will be about half, but not exactly half, the amount of cytoplasm in the parent cell.  In addition, each daughter cell will have about half of the organelles from the cytoplasm of the parent cell.  In contrast to mitosis, there is no precise mechanism working during cytokinesis to guarantee that each daughter cell will receive exactly half of the parent cell's cytoplasm and its organelles.

	Cytokinesis does not always occur when mitosis occurs because in some cells (such as those found in certain molds) mitosis occurs repeatedly without cytokinesis taking place.  In this case, each repeated replication of genetic material with no division of cytoplasm (or final separation into new daughter cells) results in cells with two nuclei.



