	In eucaryotic cells there are two distinct but overlapping stages of cell division.  In the first stage, mitosis, one complete set of chromosomes goes to each daughter cell.  Mitosis guarantees that all of the genetic information in the nuclear DNA of the parent cell will go to each daughter cell.
	In the second stage of cell division the cytoplasm and its contents divide.  This process is cytokinesis.  Cytokinesis is not as precise a process as mitosis.  The amount of cytoplasm in a daughter cell will be about half of that in the parent cell.  Each daughter cell will have about half of the organelles from the cytoplasm of the parent cell.  But there is no precise mechanism working during cytokinesis to guarantee that each daughter cell will receive exactly half of the parent cell's cytoplasm and its organelles.
	There are four distinct phases of mitosis: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase.  These phases are well-known because it is possible to observe them with the light microscope.
	The first phase of mitosis is called prophase.  During this phase the invisible threadlike chromatin of the nucleus condense into doubled chromosomes, each unit of which is called a chromatid.  In the human cell there are 92 chromatids, which result from replication of the 46 chromosomes during the S phase of the interphase.  The chromatids are attached at one place, like Siamese twins.  The place where they are attached is called the centromere.
	In animal cells, two small structures called centrioles move to opposite ends of the cell.  Around each centriole, filaments develop and radiate in all directions.  These filaments resemble a flower and are called asters.  During later prophase, many of the filaments between the centrioles lengthen and connect with each other.  This network of filaments is called the spindle.  Late in prophase some filaments of the spindle become attached to the kinetochores, which link the chromatids.  In human cells, prophase lasts from 30 to 60 seconds.
	In the second phase of mitosis, called metaphase, the chromatids become aligned at the midregion, or equator, of the cell.  At this time the centrioles, if present, are at opposite ends of the cell.  These regions are called the poles. Also during metaphase, the formation of the spindle is completed.  Metaphase in human cells requires from two to six minutes.
	At the beginning of anaphase, the third phase of mitosis, the kinetochores all divide at one time.  This causes the chromatids to separate into daughter chromosomes.  They then move equally to each pole.
	The fourth stage of mitosis, called telophase, begins when all the chromosomes reach the two poles.  During telophase the spindle begins to disappear.  Later, the nuclear membrane reappears and encloses the two groups of chromosomes.  While this is happening, the chromosomes begin to disappear as the chromatin material spreads throughout the nucleus.
	Cytokinesis, the division of the cytoplasm, also begins during telophase.  In animal cells the cytoplasm begins to pinch inward.  In plant cells a partition, called the cell plate, begins to grow and divide the cytoplasm.  Telophase in humans is quite variable, requiring from 30 to 60 minutes.
	The preliminary steps of cytokinesis occur during the G phases of the cell cycle.  In the G phases, various membrane structures, such as the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi bodies, are produced out of components in the cytoplasm.  Therefore, before cytokinesis, there is growth in the size of the cytoplasm and in the number of its organelles.
	During the G phases there is reproduction of the mitochondria and chloroplasts.  These organelles contain their own DNA, called organelle DNA, and their reproduction includes its replication.
	Cytokinesis usually begins during telophase and continues after the nuclei of the daughter cells are completely formed.  However, cytokinesis does not always occur when mitosis occurs.  In some cells, such as those found in certain molds, mitosis occurs repeatedly without cytokinesis taking place.  This results in cells with several nuclei.

