	 During the 19th century Russia had managed to stay on the side-lines of the political. economic and scientific revolutions  which had socially transformed the rest of Europe.  Political power in Russia was controlled by the Czars  who reacted with a firm hand against any attempt at reform by some social groups. This situation provoked a great disparity_between rich and poor: the former controlled the whole of society while the latter had neither rights nor economic resources.
	 At the out-set of the 20th century. the nobility and the clergy were still the dominant social groups.  The middle class was practically non-existent and  the minority social group of the proletariat pushed for revolution.  The agricultural farm labor social group was the largest  with four fifths of the population.
	 Between 1881 and 1914 economic growth took place in Russia  thanks to foreign capital loans. Given this economic growth,  the population grew notably and  industrial production was sufficiently high enough  to favor railway expansion. The foreign loans not only did not solve the problems of the population but forced Russia into ever greater debt With even more countries.
	 The situation of economic dependence brought about by foreign capital loans was strongly denounced by Lenin,  founder of the Bolshevik Party,  which was made up of revolutionary groups,  that would later bring about the socialist revolution, as a means of implementing radical changes.
	The social groups, after  the defeat of the Russian fleet in the Japanese-Russo War at the end of 1904  provoked the mobilization of labor in a series of uprisings, throughout the country,  which ended in the Revolution of 1905.  The revolutionaries, who protested strongly about the extreme poverty and social injustice with which they lived, tried to eliminate the czarist regime and  make Czar Nicolas II follow more politically liberal lines  via the formation of a consultative assembly called "Duma."
	In spite of the reforms introduced, the situation remained as it was. Thus, in response,  two more revolutions took place in Russia in 1917.  The first was the February Revolution  fomented by Russian defeats against the German army. In full knowledge of these military defeats,  small business owners, soldiers, and students joined the ranks of the strike held by the metallurgy and textile workers of Saint Petersburg. As a consequence of the strike,  the power of the czars was replaced by that of the Executive Committee of the Duma,  presided over by Kerenski, and  by the Soviet Congress which represented the soldiers and workers.
	 The second revolution in the same year occurred in October  when the Kerenski government implemented measures against the Bolsheviks and decided to continue with the war against Germany.  It was then that the soldiers rose up against their superiors,  and that the Bolsheviks, who controlled the Soviet Congress and who were lead by Lenin,  forced Kerenski and his followers to flee.  With this revolution the Communist Party became the ruling force.


