	What do a dog, a bat, a monkey, and a whale have in common? They are all mammals. Mammals are a special class of vertebrates (animals with backbones) that share certain traits or characteristics.  Mammals are found on land, in water, and in the air because they have developed traits that allow them to live in many different environments. Mammals are a successful group of animals. A group of animals is successful (a) if its members are found in many types of environments, (b) if there are many of them or (c) if they have survived for long periods of evolutionary time.

	One trait that allows mammals to live in many different environments is that they have developed special ways of protecting their young from the dangers of the environment. One way that the young are protected is that fertilization is internal in mammals, and the young develop inside the mother's body. The amount of development at birth varies with the type of mammal. A mammal that is not well developed at birth is more dependent on its parents' care than one that is fully developed. Mammals care more for their young than other kinds of animals. The mammary gland is found only in mammals and is used in the care of their young. A mammary gland is a structure in female mammals that secretes milk. The milk provides food for the young.

	Another trait that allows mammals to live in many different places is that they are warm-blooded. Unlike reptiles, such as snakes or lizards, which need the sun to stay warm, the mammal's body can maintain a nearly constant temperature, regardless of the temperature of the environment. Like birds, they have a four-chambered heart that helps them do this. The heart keeps the body warm by pumping blood to all parts of the body. The upper chambers of the heart  are called atria. The atria receive blood from other parts of the body. The lower chambers, called ventricles, pump blood to other parts of the body. Structures called valves are found between the upper and lower chambers. Valves are flaps that open and close. They control the flow of blood between the upper and lower chambers.

	A third trait of mammals that allows them to live in many different environments is that they are the only animals that have hair or fur. Though some mammals have little or no hair, most are covered with hair. Hair insulates mammals in much the same way that feathers insulate birds. It  keeps them from getting too hot or too cold.

	Another physical trait of mammals is that they can eat many different kinds of food because they have very specialized teeth. This trait also helps them to live in different kinds of environments. There are four types of teeth in mammals: incisors, canines, premolars, and molars. The number and shape of each of these types of teeth are related to the kind of food the mammal eats. Meat-eating mammals, such as wolves and lions, have long, pointed canine teeth, that are used for tearing. Their incisors are chisel-shaped and are used for cutting. Plant-eating mammals, such as horses and cows, have large, flat premolars and molars. These teeth are used for grinding plant materials.

	Another important reason why mammals are so successful is that they have a well-developed nervous system that includes a complex brain. In general, the brain of a mammal is larger than that of other vertebrates. Mammals are more intelligent than most other vertebrates. Their large and complex brain supports the complex behavior which is another characteristic trait of mammals. 

	Mammals have two types of behavior: learned and instinctive behaviors. The ability to learn complex behaviors also contributes to the success of mammals. An example of learned behavior is seen in bears. Alaskan brown bears teach their offspring to hunt salmon. The young bears carefully watch their mother. After practice, the young bears will become skilled hunters.

	Instincts are complex, inborn patterns of behavior that don't have to be learned. For example, soon after a mammal is born, it finds its mother's mammary gland, or breast, and begins to feed on milk. Without being taught, the newborn seeks its mother's breast. This behavior is inborn. Breast-feeding is one type of instinct that mammals have, but  mammals have many other types of instincts. Migration is an instinct of some mammals. The defense of certain territory is another. Hibernation is another instinct of mammals. Hibernation is a type of deep sleep in which an animal has a lowered body temperature. Many mammals hibernate during winter. Food, needed to supply energy, is scarce in winter. A great amount of energy is needed 
to maintain a normal body temperature during cold weather. Since a hibernating animal maintains a low body temperature, it uses little energy. Thus, mammals who hibernate can live in environments with cold winters.


	 

