	What do a dog, a bat, a monkey, and a whale have in common? They are all mammals. A mammal is a warm-blooded vertebrate that has hair and that feeds milk to its young. Mammals are a successful group of animals. A group of animals is successful if its members are found in many types of environments or in great numbers. Mammals are found on land, in water, and in the air. 

	Mammals are the only animals that have hair or fur. Though some mammals have little or no hair, most are covered with hair. Hair insulates mammals in much the same way that feathers insulate birds.

	Fertilization is internal in mammals. The young of nearly all mammals develop inside the mother's body. The amount of development at birth varies with the type of mammal. A mammal that is not fully developed at birth is dependent on its parents' care. The amount of care given to the young is greater in mammals than in any other class of animal. The mammary gland is found only in mammals and is used in the care of their young. A mammary gland is a structure in female mammals that secretes milk. The milk provides food for the young.

	Like birds, mammals have a four-chambered heart. The upper chambers are called atria. The atria receive blood from other parts of the body. The lower chambers, called ventricles, pump blood to other parts of the body. Structures called valves are found between the upper and lower chambers. The valves are flaps that open and close. They control the flow of blood between the upper and lower chambers.

	Another important trait of all mammals is a well-developed nervous system that includes a complex brain. In general, the brain of a mammal is larger than that of other vertebrates. Mammals are more intelligent than most other vertebrates.

	Mammals have very specialized teeth. There are four types of teeth in mammals: incisors, canines, premolars, and molars. The number and shape of each of these types of teeth are related to the kind of food the mammal eats. Meat-eating mammals, such as wolves and lions, have long, pointed canine teeth that are used for tearing. Their incisors are chisel-shaped and are used for cutting. Plant-eating mammals, such as horses and cows, have large, flat premolars and molars. These teeth are used for grinding plant materials. 

	The complex behavior of mammals is another trait of this class. Soon after a mammal is born, it finds its mother's mammary gland, or breast, and begins to feed on milk. Without being taught, the newborn seeks its mother's breast. This behavior is inborn. A complex, inborn pattern of behavior is called an instinct. Breast-feeding is one type of instinct. Mammals have many types of instincts. Migration is an instinct of some mammals. The defense of certain territory is another.

	Hibernation is another instinct of mammals. Hibernation is a type of deep sleep in which an animal has a lowered body temperature. Many mammals hibernate during winter. Food, needed to supply energy, is scarce in winter. A great amount of energy is needed to maintain a normal body temperature during cold weather. Since a hibernating animal maintains a low body temperature, it uses little energy.

	Though many types of animal behavior are instinctive, mammals also learn behavior. An example of learned behavior is seen in bears. Alaskan brown bears teach their offspring to hunt salmon. The young bears carefully watch their mother. After practice, the young bears will become skilled hunters.
	 	

