   	Padria is a small tropical country with a population of about 8 million people. Because the country is mountainous except near the coast, the country's main source of income comes from the tropical fruits and vegetables which it produces along the coast and exports. Padria requires more money than obtained from exports, and in 1965 they began to receive support from a much larger and more powerful country, Kalina, which is located inland about 500 miles away. Since Kalina is a landlocked country, Padria allowed Kalina to build a naval base on its coast in return for their financial support. Kalina continues to maintain the base today. This base provides extra military protection for Padria, and the military personnel stationed there also help to boost Padria's economy through their spending. There are three distinct economic classes in Padria. The rich, who are landowners and run the government, account for between 5 and 10 percent of the total population. There is also a small professional class. The vast majority of the population, however, consists of peasants who work on farms and in other menial occupations. While the rich have a high standard of living and are able to obtain a quality education, the peasants have very little, if any, formal education and their standard of living is extremely low. Padria has maintained its strongly Roman Catholic origins, especially among the peasants.

  	Only landowners are allowed to vote in Padria. They elect the members of the Parliament, and the Parliament members in turn appoint a President to a 4-year term. The current President of Padria is Martin Gold, the son of a prominent landowner, who was reluctantly appointed to the position last year by the Parliament. Gold agreed to assume the Presidency only after being assured that he and his family would receive adequate protection against possible violence by members of the resistance movement.

  	The resistance movement in Padria opposes the current form of government, and it is rumored that a number of Padrian priests are very active in this movement. This group consists of individuals who have set up bases in the mountains and they broadcast to the population about the need for social change and land reform. The goals of the resistance movement, according to its leader, are to force the country to become democratic, giving the right to vote to every adult, and to produce land reform so that more people would be able to own land. The leader of the resistance movement is John Lerner, a peasant who grew up in a one-room shack on the estate of one of the highest government officials, where his parents were employed as crop laborers. The nanny who was employed to teach the official's children took an interest in the bright child, and taught him basic reading and math skills in her spare time. When he was old enough, the nanny saw to it that John was able to leave Padria to pursue his education. Only after leaving his native country did John realize the true economic disparities that existed there, and after completing his education, he returned to Padria in 1985 for the sole purpose of helping his people attain a better standard of living. The group is condemned as "radicals" by the landowners who want to see the movement destroyed. The resistance group has obtained arms, but it is not clear from whom. Some people say the arms were provided by a neighboring country, Norland, while others say they were obtained from Ronstan, a large industrial country located about 1,500 miles from Padria and about 1,000 miles from Kalina. 

  	Kalina is a large, powerful country with a population of approximately 70 million people. Economically, Kalina is very industrialized, but it also has a highly developed agricultural community. Kalina does import fruits and vegetables from Padria, but its main interest in the smaller country is keeping it from falling under the control of Ronstan, which would jeopardize Kalina's strategic Padrian naval base.

  	Culturally, Kalina is pluralistic, with its citizens coming from a wide variety of religious and cultural backgrounds. A number of political parties exist in Kalina, and these parties are related to a large extent to the country's ethnic populations. The standard of living in Kalina is generally high, with most of its citizens finishing high school and many obtaining some higher education, as well.

  	Politically, Kalina is a democratic country with a President and a parliament elected by popular vote. Kalina is concerned about its role in world affairs and is quite strong militarily. It sends military supplies to Padria to help keep the existing government in power there. The leader of Kalina, President Lang, believes that the "radicals" in Padria are receiving support from Ronstan. He feels that if they take over, Padria will sever relations with Kalina and provide Ronstan with a naval base and other support, thereby increasing the threat to Kalina.

  	Ronstan is reasonably strong economically, although it is spending large amounts of money on the military. Ronstan is especially interested in increasing its world influence so that it can enhance trade and help its economy. The economic and political operation of Ronstan is completely controlled by the Centralist Party, since no opposition parties exist in the country. Government policy is set by the President, Daniel Blank, along with six men who form the Command Group. The ideological base of Ronstan's government centers on government by the selected. The Centralist Party, it is argued, is in the best position to select who runs the country, and it is held that government by party selection is the best form of government.

  	In past months, there has been an increase in the resistance movement in Padria. Fortified with the arms they obtained, the group began to militantly take over agricultural land. Padria's government sent out its army to combat these "radicals," but the army was fortunate to hold its own and was unable to regain any of the territory held by the resistance movement. Padria's government appealed to Kalina for additional support, and Kalina sent more supplies and a group of "advisors" to Padria.

  	Ronstan objected strongly when it became aware of Kalina' s involvement in Padria and stated that, while it had not yet supported the freedom-seeking "heros" of the resistance movement, it was now going to do so. A few days later, Ronstan began dropping troops and supplies by parachute into the mountain bases of the resistance movement. In response, Kalina increased its military support of the existing Padrian government and began to send its troops into the small country. Ronstan and Kalina, wanting to avoid an ìall-outî war with each other, have fought only in support of the two respective sides in Padria. Meanwhile, casualty levels in Padria continued to escalate, and many civilians became the unfortunate victims of the fighting. 

  	More recently, a bomb exploded in the capital of Padria, killing President Gold and several other key political figures, thereby forcing Padriaís parliament to appoint temporary government officials. Officials in Kalina claimed that either members of the resistance movement or officials in Rostan had plotted the assassination of Padriaís President, but Rostan and the resistance movement claimed that Kalina was responsible for the murder, doing it specifically in order to lay the blame on Rostan and turn world opinion against them. 

  	The leader of a neutral country, Zengard, has agreed to mediate the dispute and just last week he was successful in bringing the leaders of the resistance movement and of Padriaís government to the conference table. Rostan government was very supportive of this meeting, but the government of Kalina strongly opposed it, saying that recognition of the ìradicalsî and their demands only create more chaos in Padria.   

