    For centuries, literally thousands of navigators have attempted to discover a sea route from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans through the frozen Canadian arctic--the Northwest Passage.  Such a route would reduce the distance from Europe to the Orient by roughly 10,000 nautical miles!

    One of the first was Martin Frobisher who sailed from London in 1576.  Frobisher sailed around the southern tip of Greenland into what is now known as the Labrador Sea and the lower end of the Davis Strait.  Shortly afterwards, John Davis led a second British expedition which accurately mapped the mouth of Hudson Strait.  He then sailed north along the Greenland's west coast into what is now known as Baffin Bay. Many brave sailors attempted the voyage.  

    William Baffin and Robert Bylot sailed the 55-ton Discovery around the entire perimeter of Baffin Bay which separated Greenland from Canada.  Expeditions resumed in 1616. Unfortunately, Captain Baffin's report of Baffin Bay was so discouraging, it put an end to naval expeditions for one hundred and fifty years.

    In 1776, Captain James Cook attempted to sail the Resolution and the Discovery east from the Bering Strait in Alaska to Baffin Bay in the east.  Then, in the latter quarter of the eighteenth century, the British Royal Navy once again became interested in the economic feasibility of the Northwest Passage. To encourage other explorers, the British Parliament offered a 20,000 pound reward to the first ship to successfully navigate the Northwest Passage.  Cook's official report to the Admiralty, which survived him, stated that commercial trade routes north of 70 degrees latitude were useless, thereby putting an end to what little hope remained of finding a navigable sea route between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Tragically, Cook was unable to pass into the arctic north due to impenetrable pack ice north of Alaska.  On his return voyage south, he was killed in the Hawaiian Islands by hostile natives.  

    Given Cook's reservations and the onset of the Napoleonic wars, the search for the Northwest Passage came to a grinding halt.  The Admiralty did so in part to quell the rampant unemployment of British sailors, in part at the insistence of greedy merchants. However, after the fall of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815, the Secretary of the Admiralty, James Barrow, resumed the search for the Northwest Passage with great zeal. 

    One possible route of special interest was the area now known as Lancaster Sound at the northwest corner of Baffin Bay. Unbeknownst to Ross, however, he had committed a spectacular blunder by concluding that Lancaster Sound was unnavigable when, in fact, it was the only feasible gateway to the Northwest Passage.  In 1818, the Admiralty commissioned John Ross in the Isabella and William Parry in the Alexander to sail up the west coast of Greenland into the Davis Strait, then proceed westward to the Bering Strait through the vast network of islands that make up the Canadian archipelago.  As it happened, Ross and Parry had very little success on their expedition and returned home the same summer.  Apparently, Ross sailed several miles into Lancaster Sound before concluding it was only an inlet, closed ahead of him by a mountain range he named the Crocker's Mountains.  In many circles, Ross' reputation was destroyed once the truth was known.

    Undaunted, Parry returned in 1819 on a second arctic mission in charge of the 375-ton Hecla.  Parry entered Lancaster Sound on July 29, 1819 and worked his way westward to Beechey Island along the southern coast of Devon Island.  From there he proceeded west to what is now known as Cornwallis Island, then further west to the southwestern tip of Melville Island, 500 miles west of Lancaster Sound which Ross had earlier concluded was impassable.  Remarkably, Parry accomplished all this despite the fact that his ship's compass was useless given his close proximity to the true magnetic North Pole. His orders were to investigate Lancaster Sound at all costs.  

    But Parry quickly encountered problems.  The Hecla was the first ship to winter over north of the Arctic Circle. First, his ship did not reach Melville Island until September 1, 1819 which meant he would have to winter over prior to continuing his journey.  Parry quickly found a small cove he named Winter Harbor and spent the next ten months frozen in pack ice 500 miles north of the Arctic Circle.    Unfortunately, once his ship was able to sail, he discovered that permanent pack ice prevented him from continuing westward.  Parry had no alternative but to return eastward to the mouth of Lancaster Sound and then to England where he collected a 5,000 pound reward for being the first ship to sail west of longitude 110 degrees!

    Then in 1829 John Ross attempted to redeem his reputation.  But things went wrong almost from the beginning.  Eventually, Ross' ship was ice-locked for four consecutive winters before he was finally rescued. Using all of his own money, Ross procured a steam powered paddle wheeler called the Victory.  Well aware that Parry was unable to sail west of Melville Island due to permanent pack ice, Ross decided to sail south down Prince Regent Inlet and seek a western passage along the northern coast of Canada.  

    Following Ross' near disaster, the efforts of the Admiralty were directed towards overland expeditions to gather additional information.  But then, in 1844, the Admiralty decided to make one more concerted effort to discover the Northwest Passage.  On May 19, 1845, John Franklin and his crew of 129 men sailed from London in the Erebus and Terror.  Nothing was known until Leopold McClintock, captain of the Fox, discovered a message left by Franklin's crew dated April 25, 1848. It described how the Erebus and Terror were beset by pack ice at sea on September 12, 1846 off the northwest shore of King William Island.  Franklin's ships entered Lancaster Sound in late July of 1845 and were never seen again.   Subsequently, Sir John Franklin died at sea on June 11, 1847. The grip of the pack ice never released them.  Everyone perished within 150 miles of the ships. The Erebus and Terror continued to drift helplessly in the pack until April 22, 1848 when they were abandoned by their desperate crews, all victims of lead poisoning from their canned provisions.  Those who died first were eaten by the survivors.

    In the wake of the Franklin disaster, the British Admiralty severely curtailed all arctic explorations.  Second, intense nationalistic pride finally gave way to a genuine concern for the welfare of the men who made these voyages. One reason was that the search for Franklin provided indisputable evidence that the Northwest Passage, while probably navigable, was too ice-choked and circuitous to be of practical use to merchant ships.  
    Then in 1903, after a 50 year intermission, a young Norwegian named Roald Amundsen sailed the 47-ton herring boat Gjoa into Lancaster Sound bound for the Bering Strait.  Finally, on August 31, 1906, Amundsen sailed into Nome, Alaska to end the 400 year old quest for the Northwest Passage. He voluntarily spent two winters conducting research on the southern tip of King William Island, the site of the Franklin disaster. Almost from the beginning, Amundsen was confident and in no hurry.  Then on August 3, 1905, the Gjoa sailed westward hugging the northern shoreline of Canada.  On August 31 of the same year, Amundsen reached the Beaufort Sea, which provided clear sailing all the way around the northern coast of Alaska.  Still in no hurry, he spent the winter near Herschel Island on the north Alaskan coast with a small fleet of whaling vessels.  
    

