	By the beginning of 1965, American officials in both South Vietnam and the U.S. had begun to focus on North Vietnam as the source of the continuing war in South Vietnam.  The South Vietnamese army was losing the ground war against North Vietnam and this caused frustrations among the American officials.  The frustrations led to pressure to bomb North Vietnam.  The idea of bombing North Vietnam found support among nearly all the American officials.  However, the civilian and military officials had serious differences over both the objective and the methods of the bombing attacks.
	Most of both civilian and military members of the Johnson administration believed bombing attacks would accomplish several things.  The bombing attacks would demonstrate clearly and forcefully the United States' resolve to halt communist North Vietnam's aggression and to support a free South Vietnam.  At the same time, the bombing attacks would provide a boost for the South Vietnamese morale which was sagging because they were losing the war.  The bombing attacks would also make North Vietnam pay an increasingly high price for supporting the war.  Among the civilian officials, the motivation for the bombing attacks was psychological rather than military.  For the civilian officials, the primary objective of the bombing was to break North Vietnam's willingness to support the war rather than its ability.  Maxwell Taylor explained the civilian view: "The objective of our air campaign is to change the will of the enemy leadership."
	In order to reach their psychological objective, the civilian officials favored the strategy of "graduated response."  The graduated response strategy was designed to show at relatively low cost the American resolve to stop North Vietnamese aggression.  Graduated response was a series of increasing attacks with pauses after each increase to allow the North Vietnamese leaders to realize the potential cost of supporting the war.  When they realized the potential cost, the North Vietnamese leaders would cease supporting the war before suffering the consequences.  If the North Vietnamese leaders did not cease supporting the war, the intensity of the bombing attacks would be further increased, with pauses between each attack to allow the North Vietnamese to realize the threat of future increases.  According to the graduated response strategy, it would be the threat of future damage that would convince the North Vietnamese to cease their aggression.  Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara explained that the pressure of the civilian strategy on North Vietnam "depends not upon the current level of bombing but rather upon the credible threat of future destruction which can be avoided by agreeing to negotiate ...."  The graduated response strategy assumed that North Vietnamese leaders would not risk the destruction of their fragile and limited industry by overwhelming American power.  Therefore, they would quickly give in and cease their aggression.
	The graduated response strategy did not find support among the military officials, particularly Air Force Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell.  The military officials believed that the graduated response strategy was a weak and indecisive strategy.  They believed the graduated response strategy would not be a clear symbol of U.S. determination and resolve because its intensity increased gradually.  They also believed that this strategy would not damage North Vietnam's war-making ability rapidly enough to be effective.  They believed that the pauses before each increase would give the North Vietnamese time to prepare psychologically and materially for the next bombing attack.  Instead, the military officials thought it was more important to destroy North Vietnam's ability to support the war.  In order to destroy North Vietnam's war-making ability and to show the strength of the U.S. resolve to win the war, the military officials favored brief and intensive bombing attacks.
	The graduated response strategy was President Johnson's choice.  In February 1965, he approved bombing attacks against a selective list of targets in North Vietnam.  The Johnson administration played down the importance of attacking North Vietnam directly.  However, these bombing attacks, which began in March under the code name of Rolling Thunder, represented an important shift in the American approach to the war in Vietnam.  Before Rolling Thunder, American attacks on North Vietnam, like the air raids following the Tonkin gulf incident, had been retaliatory attacks in response to specific attacks on American military forces.  In contrast to these retaliatory attacks, Rolling Thunder aimed at the "larger pattern of aggression" by North Vietnam.  By Operation Rolling Thunder, American officials were now holding North Vietnam directly responsible for the war in South Vietnam.
	From the beginning, the bombing attacks of Operation Rolling Thunder had many restrictions and limitations.  Restrictions included the rates of bombing attacks, targets, and even tactics and bomb loads.  Aerial bombing attacks have rarely been so strictly controlled by civilians before.  A small civilian group composed of the President, the Secretaries of Defense and State, and a handful of other senior officials made decisions about target selection, attack rates, and routes.  The decisions of the civilian officials were only loosely guided by recommendations from military officials.  The civilian officials imposed restrictions of 30 nautical miles around the North Vietnamese capital city of Hanoi and 15 nautical miles around the port of Haiphong.  Such restrictions were intended to limit civilian casualties and to reduce the risk of confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviet Union or China.  However, these restrictions immediately limited the effectiveness of the bombing attacks because Hanoi and Haiphong were the center of North Vietnam's industry and these cities were also the entry point for supplies from the Soviet Union and People's Republic of China.  A restriction with a similar effect was a strip 30 miles wide along the Chinese border.
	The bombing attacks of the graduated response strategy had increased in intensity by the summer of 1965.  An example of the increase was that the possible target area had been extended from the 19th parallel to the 20th to cover a larger area in North Vietnam, and then the target area was moved still further North.  Also, in addition to targets specified by the civilian officials, bombing forces had limited freedom to attack targets of opportunity in certain areas.  Such targets of opportunity included military barracks, naval bases, railroad yards, ferries, bridges, road repair equipment, and lines of communication (LOCs).  The total number of attacks had risen to 900 a week, which was four times the number of attacks when Rolling Thunder began.
	Despite such an increase in the intensity of the attacks, the bombing attacks had not achieved the objective of breaking the will of the North Vietnamese.  The civilian officials, who favored graduated response, had conceived of these bombing attacks as a "low cost option with prospects for speedy, positive results."  However, the result of the attacks was that North Vietnamese showed no signs of quitting.  This was confirmed by a CIA report: "The strikes to date have not caused a change in the North Vietnamese policy ....  If anything, the strikes ... have hardened their attitude."
	The failure of the graduated response strategy to obtain positive results led to a clear shift in the nature of the air war.  The shift was from the civilian strategy of attacking psychological targets to stopping forcefully the North Vietnamese soldiers and materials moving to South Vietnam.  When Rolling Thunder began, before the civilian officials shifted to their new view, they had hoped that graduated response strategy would stop the war.  Since the war was still going on, the civilian officials shifted to the view that the objective of the aerial bombing attacks against North Vietnam was to help win the ground war in South Vietnam.  Reflecting this shift in the civilian view, greater emphasis was placed on bombing North Vietnam's lines of communication both in the panhandle of North Vietnam and along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in eastern Laos.
