	By the fall of 1964, Americans in both Saigon and Washington had begun to focus on Hanoi as the source of the continuing problem in the south.  As frustrations mounted over the inability of the ARVN to defeat the enemy in the field, pressure to strike directly at North Vietnam began to build.  Although there was near unanimity among American officials over the aerial extension of the war into North Vietnam, serious differences arose over both the objective and the methods to be used.
	Most members of the Johnson administration believed bombing attacks would accomplish several things.  They would demonstrate clearly and forcefully the United States' resolve to halt communist aggression and to support a free Vietnam.  At the same time, they would provide a boost for the sagging morale of the South Vietnamese.  They would also make Hanoi pay an increasingly high price for supporting the Vietcong.  Particularly among civilian advocates, the motivation for such a campaign was psychological rather than military, the primary objective not being Hanoi's capability but its willingness to support the war.  "In a very real sense," explained Maxwell Taylor, "the objective of our air campaign is to change the will of the enemy leadership."
	Those who stressed the psychological impact favored strategy of "graduated response," a series of escalating attacks designed to show American resolve at relatively low cost while allowing the North Vietnamese leadership to realize the potential cost of supporting the war and thus cease that support before suffering the consequences.  If they did not change their ways, severity of the attacks would gradually be increased, with pauses between each increment to allow the enemy time to come to their senses.  According to this theory, it would be the fear of future damage that would convince the enemy to cease their aggression.  As late as the summer of 1965 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara argued, "At any time, 'pressure' on the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) depends not upon the current level of bombing but rather upon the credible threat of future destruction which can be avoided by agreeing to negotiate ...."  Graduated response assumed North Vietnam would not risk its fragile and limited industrial base in the face of overwhelming American power and would quickly succumb to the pressure thus exerted.
	The Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), particularly Air Force Chief of Staff General John P. McConnell, adamantly opposed this approach.  Graduated response, they contended, was a weak and indecisive strategy.  It would not provide a clear symbol of our determination and resolve because of its incremental nature; nor would it damage Hanoi's war-making capability rapidly enough to be effective.  Moreover, gradual escalation would give the enemy time to prepare psychologically and materially for each step.  The military leaders emphasized destruction of the enemy's capability to support the war rather than his will and favored brief but intensive operations to eliminate Hanoi's war-making capacity and to demonstrate the strength of the United States' commitment to win the war in a military sense.
	In February 1965, President Johnson approved bombing operations against a selective list of targets in North Vietnam.  While the government played down the significance of this step, Operation Rolling Thunder, which actually began in March, represented an important shift in the American approach to the war.  The air raids following the Tonkin Gulf incident had been retaliatory strikes in response to specific attacks on American military forces.  Rolling Thunder, in contrast, was linked more broadly to the "larger pattern of aggression" by both the Vietcong and the North Vietnam.  Washington was now holding North Vietnam directly responsible for the war in the South.
	From the beginning, Rolling Thunder was hedged with restrictions and limitations on sortie rates, targets, and even tactics and bomb loads.  Rarely has the use of air power been so strictly controlled by civilians.  Target selection, sortie rates, and routes were decided on a weekly (later biweekly) basis by a small group composed of the President and the secretaries of defense and State, and a handful of other senior officials only loosely guided by recommendations from CINCPAC and the JCS.  Washington imposed restrictions of 30 and 15 nautical miles respectively around the capital city of Hanoi and the port of Haiphong.  Intended to reduce the risk of superpower confrontation and to limit civilian casualties, these restrictions immediately limited the effectiveness of the campaign since the two cities were the center of North Vietnam's industrial base and the entry point for supplies from the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China.  Also, off-limits was a strip 30 miles wide along the Chinese border.
	By summer Rolling Thunder had grown in intensity.  The possible target area had been extended from the 19th parallel to the 20th and then moved still further North.  In addition to specified "hard targets" (stationary), strike forces had limited freedom to attack targets of opportunity in certain designated areas.  Targets included military barracks, naval bases, railroad yards, ferries, bridges, road repair equipment, and lines of communication (LOCs).  The total number of sorties had risen to 900 a week, more than four times that of March.
	Yet the bombing campaign had not achieved its objective.  American policymakers had conceived of graduated response as a "low cost option with prospects for speedy, positive results."  However, Hanoi showed no signs of quitting.  In the words of a CIA assessment of the early operations, "The strikes to date had not caused a change in the North Vietnamese policy ....  If anything, the strikes ... have hardened their attitude."
	The failure to obtain results led to a perceptible shift in the nature of the air war.  While Rolling Thunder would continue, by July 1965 the objective slowly shifted from that of attacking psychological targets to the interdiction of North Vietnamese men and materials moving south.  Whatever had been the hopes cherished by some officials in February and March, civilian leaders now conceived of the air campaign against the North as complementary to the ground war in the South.  Reflecting this shifting objective, greater emphasis was placed on enemy lines of communication both in the panhandle of North Vietnam and along the Ho Chi Minh Trail in eastern Laos.

