	In 1895, Cagland invaded one of its neighboring countries and divided it into two separate entities, Anchad and Boxgrave. Since Boxgrave was primarily an agricultural region, it was of little value to the Caglanders whose own agricultural area was prosperous. Cagland therefore withdrew its occupation of Boxgrave in 1901 but remained in Anchad for economic reasons, specifically its vast wealth of mineral resources and its strategic port position. After several decades, Caglandís President Morris Roscovitch argued successfully that the cost of maintaining the occupation of Anchad had become much higher than the economic benefits originally gained from the invasion. Therefore, in 1948, Cagland also withdrew its occupation of Anchad, but Anchad and Boxgrave have remained separate countries.

  	Cultural changes in Anchad occurred as a result of the invasion by Cagland. One notable change was in the country's language. The Anchadians were forced to adopt the Caglandian language, and with the passage of time a distinct regional dialect, a mixture of the two languages, developed in Anchad. Another noticeable change as a result of the invasion was in terms of religion. The country which was split into Boxgrave and Anchad had been primarily of the Catholic faith. The Caglanders, however, were mainly of the Protestant faith, and over the years the majority of the Anchadians converted to these beliefs.
  
  	Immediately after Cagland withdrew from Boxgrave, the highest ranking military leader, Admiral White, took control and set up a dictatorial government. His first priority was to build up a massive military force to ensure Boxgraveís safety from a future invasion. In 1970, Admiral White's successor, General Howe, passed the leadership on to General Jones, whom he had groomed to take over the government. Jones had very strong ethnic leanings, and his life-long dream of reuniting Anchad and Boxgrave remained a closely guarded secret, shared only with those who he felt he could trust completely. Jones was quite aware of the great disparity between the two nations, but felt very strongly that a reunion would be beneficial to everyone involved. During recent years, General Jones steadily increased the country's military strength. He initiated mandatory military service by all Boxgravian males, doubled the size of the country's standing army, and also negotiated a major weapons purchase from Doxland. The General informed the Boxgravian citizens that this build-up was necessary to defend against possible invasion by expansionistic governments. Some of Jones' advisors, however, thought that he felt threatened by the "radicals" within his own country, and was afraid that they might unknowingly disrupt his efforts to negotiate a friendly merger with Anchad.
  
  	Next to General Jones, the highest-ranking official in Boxgrave was General Wolt. By doing "dirty work" for others, Wolt had been rapidly promoted through the military ranks and felt confident that he would be the next leader of Boxgrave. Although Wolt himself had never specifically stated it, many felt that he sought power and probably wanted to extend Boxgrave's territory into prosperous Anchad.
  
  	Throughout the years, Boxgrave has remained primarily agricultural and is much poorer than Anchad. The citizens have low levels of education, with the majority of the children never reaching high school because they are needed at home to help their families work the crops. Recent drought conditions and the subsequent failure of most of the crops have combined with the huge military expenditures to result in extremely poor economic conditions and a very low standard of living. The citizens are becoming increasingly dissatisfied with their government, but cannot openly condemn it for fear of being "detained" by the military. An "underground" network has developed, led by individuals who want to overthrow the dictator and change Boxgrave's government to a democracy, and this movement has gained a great deal of momentum during the last few years.
  
  	Anchad, on the other hand, has prospered since the invasion. During its occupation, Cagland made major improvements in Anchad. Vast mining operations were put into place, and the development of the port allowed the Anchadians to export their mineral resources to countries all over the world. After Cagland's withdrawal, a democratic form of government was put into place, with a new president and a parliament representing the nation's three political parties being elected every five years. The Anchadian citizens have been encouraged to voice their opinions and to be actively involved in the workings of their government.
  
  	The Anchadians were able to maintain their global trading after they gained their independence, and with their mineral resources in even greater demand, Anchad's economy has flourished. This economic success allowed the Anchadian government to develop a wide range of progran1s aimed at raising the standard of living of its citizens. A great deal of time and energy were spent developing Anchad's educational system, which has received a great deal of praise from educators around the world. The vast majority of the Anchadian citizens have completed a high school education, and many have gone on to college. The government also encouraged cultural development and provided funding for a wide range of endeavors, from the ballet to the national zoo.
  
  	Anchad's current President, Joseph Mann, is now serving the third year of his term in office. Because of his popularity with the Anchadian people and the country's position in world-wide trade, President Mann has a great deal of power as well as the respect of other leaders. Recently, though, negative opinions about the president have been growing. Last month, Mann rejected a bill developed by members of the Unified political party, which holds the majority of the seats in the legislature. The bill called for a tax increase in order to fund a build-up of the military, and many Anchadians are very upset and angry about Mann's refusal to sign the bill. Currently, service in Anchad's military is voluntary, and it functions more as a reserve unit than a standing military threat. The citizens are concerned with recent reports indicating huge weapons purchases by Boxgrave. Reliable sources have also confirmed several unsuccessful attempts by high-ranking Boxgravian officials to negotiate the purchase of nuclear weapons, and this frightens the Anchadian people.
  
  	General Jones arranged a meeting with Anchad's President Mann and presented him with the proposal that Anchad and Boxgrave reunite. Mann's immediate response was that under no circumstances would Anchad bear the burden of "bailing out" the depressed Boxgravian economy, and that, regardless of ethnic ties, a merger was completely out of the question. News of the meeting spread quickly through Anchad, and many citizens were appalled that Mann would so quickly dismiss the idea of a reunification. After all, the Boxgravians were in a desperate state and the Anchadiam felt that, in light of their own prosperity, they should help their former countrymen. Massive demonstrations against the position of the Anchadian government broke out rapidly all across the country.
  
  	Upon returning to Boxgrave, Jones was devastated, his life-long dream of reunification brutally shattered. Wolt convinced Jones that the only way to realize his dream was to organize a group of individuals whose purpose would be to infiltrate Anchad's government and place supporters of a merger in power. Mann, however, found out about the plot and was furious. In preparation for possible take-over attempt by Boxgrave, Mann activated Anchadís military units to defend the border between the two countries, and reiterated his position regarding Boxgrave, saying that Anchad would not tolerate any type of interference by the Boxgravian.
  
  	Four months later, General Jones was suddenly assassinated by an unknown assailant, and Wolt immediately took over the command of Boxgrave. Walt publicly accused the Anchadian leaders of plotting the assassination, saying that even the "extremists" in Boxgrave would not do such a thing. The Anchadian leaders firmly denied these accusations, claiming that Wolt was upset by Anchad's refusal to reunify and was just trying to stir up trouble.
  
  	Last week, the Anchadian press reported that a Boxgravian patrol unit crossed over the border into Anchad, where they were warned to return to their own land. Instead, they opened fire on the Anchadian soldiers. The Boxgravian press, however, published a completely different version of the incident, saying that the Anchadian soldiers fired over the border at the Boxgravians and were clearly preparing to cross the border into Boxgrave. After the incident, each side mobilized its forces, and only yesterday a Boxgravian plane dropped bombs on Anchad's capitol.

