	In 1895, Cagland invaded one of its neighboring countries and divided it into two separate entities, Anchad and Boxgrave. Cagland withdrew its occupation of Boxgrave in 1901 but remained in Anchad. In 1948, Cagland also withdrew its occupation of Anchad, but Anchad and Boxgrave have remained separate countries.

  	Cultural changes in Anchad occurred as a result of the invasion by Cagland. One notable change was in the country's language. And with the passage of time a distinct regional dialect, a mixture of the two languages, developed in Anchad. Another noticeable change as a result of the invasion was in terms of religion. The country which was split into Boxgrave and Anchad had been primarily of the Catholic faith. The Caglanders, however, were mainly of the Protestant faith, and over the years the majority of the Anchadians converted to these beliefs.
  
  	Immediately after Cagland withdrew from Boxgrave, the highest ranking military leader, Admiral White, took control and set up a dictatorial government. In 1970, Admiral White's successor, General Howe, passed the leadership on to General Jones, whom he had groomed to take over the government. During recent years, General Jones steadily increased the country's military strength. 
  
  	Next to General Jones, the highest-ranking official in Boxgrave was General Wolt. Wolt had been rapidly promoted through the military ranks. Throughout the years, Boxgrave has remained primarily agricultural and is much poorer than Anchad. The citizens have low levels of education, with the majority of the children never reaching high school, extremely poor economic conditions and a very low standard of living. The citizens are becoming increasingly dissatisfied with their government, but cannot openly condemn it. An "underground" network has developed, led by individuals who want to overthrow the dictator and change Boxgrave's government to a democracy, and this movement has gained a great deal of momentum during the last few years.
  
  	Anchad, on the other hand, has prospered since the invasion. After Cagland's withdrawal, a democratic form of government was put into place. The Anchadian citizens have been encouraged to voice their opinions and to be actively involved in the workings of their government. Anchad's economy has flourished. The Anchadian government developed a wide range of progran1s aimed at raising the standard of living of its citizens. The vast majority of the Anchadian citizens have completed a high school education, and many have gone on to college. The government also encouraged cultural development and provided funding for a wide range of endeavors, from the ballet to the national zoo.
  
  	Anchad's current President, Joseph Mann, is now serving the third year of his term in office. President Mann has a great deal of power as well as the respect of other leaders. Recently, though, negative opinions about the president have been growing. Currently, service in Anchad's military is voluntary, and it functions more as a reserve unit than a standing military threat. The citizens are concerned with recent reports indicating huge weapons purchases by Boxgrave. Reliable sources have also confirmed several unsuccessful attempts by high-ranking Boxgravian officials to negotiate the purchase of nuclear weapons, and this frightens the Anchadian people.
  
  	General Jones arranged a meeting with Anchad's President Mann and presented him with the proposal that Anchad and Boxgrave reunite. Mann's immediate response was that a merger was completely out of the question. News of the meeting spread quickly through Anchad, and many citizens were appalled that Mann would so quickly dismiss the idea of a reunification. Massive demonstrations against the position of the Anchadian government broke out rapidly all across the country.
  
  	Upon returning to Boxgrave, Jones was devastated. Wolt convinced Jones that the only way to realize his dream was to organize a group of individuals whose purpose would be to infiltrate Anchad's government and place supporters of a merger in power. Mann, however, found out about the plot and was furious. 
  
  
  	Four months later, General Jones was suddenly assassinated by an unknown assailant, and Wolt immediately took over the command of Boxgrave. Walt publicly accused the Anchadian leaders of plotting the assassination. The Anchadian leaders firmly denied these accusations.
  
  	Last week, the Anchadian press reported that a Boxgravian patrol unit crossed over the border into Anchad, where they were warned to return to their own land. Instead, they opened fire on the Anchadian soldiers. The Boxgravian press, however, published a completely different version of the incident, saying that the Anchadian soldiers fired over the border at the Boxgravians and were clearly preparing to cross the border into Boxgrave. After the incident, each side mobilized its forces, and only yesterday a Boxgravian plane dropped bombs on Anchad's capitol.
  

