A man lies dying under a tree in Somalia. Then something very unusual in this country happens: the police arrive. A white Toyota car stops suddenly and six policemen jump out. Three of them chase a man and arrest him. The others inspect the body. Another officer finds the murder weapon and says: 'Evidence'.
 
This was a training exercise, one of the last before the 134 men and 19 women of the Armo Police Academy, in northern Somalia, graduated last month. They are the first police trained in Somalia for 15 years. 'You are the beginning of hope for the Somali police,' said Bashir Jama, 52, the deputy police commissioner, speaking to the new graduates. 

Hope is a word which you do not hear very often in Somalia, which is probably the most lawless country in the world and one of the most dangerous. Since the end of the rule of the dictator Mohamed Siad Barre in 1991, there has been no central government. Many people have tried to form a government but without success. There are no state schools, hospitals or social services. More than 400,000 people are refugees in their own country. Warlords and their gangs rule the country. 'We have one religion, one people, so we are one family, really,' said Abdinur Yusuf, 70, a senior policeman who is helping to train the new police at Armo. 'Our problem is that many people want to be head of that family.' 

In October 2004 elders elected a 275-member government. The president is Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed and the other members are the warlords who have caused the chaos in Somalia for the last 15 years. But the government does not control any large towns or cities; it has no ministries and no money. 

Somalia used to have the best police force in sub-Saharan Africa. Now it has just a few hundred police officers and no army. The government cannot guarantee its own security, and it certainly cannot guarantee the security of the people of Somalia. This is why the new police training academy was so important. It is located in the small town of Armo, an hour's drive south of the Red Sea port of Bossaso, and was built last year with money from the UN Development Programme (UNDP).
 
Three Ugandan police officers working for the UNDP have been training the new Somali policemen. They did not train them to use guns because the import of guns into Somalia has been officially prohibited since 1992. The trainers are worried that the four-month course is too short. But the trainees are very enthusiastic. Andrew Kaweesi, 32, an assistant superintendent in the Ugandan police, said: 'The trainees who've never been in the militia are the  best students. Some of the militia have bad morals ... like taking money from people at roadblocks.' 

Sooner or later the new police force and then the new Somali army will need members of the militia. Tens of thousands of young men work for private militias and the only way to make them give up their weapons will be to offer them something else. In the next few weeks about 100 of the graduates from the Armo academy will fly to the government's base at Baidoa in central Somalia. Another 200 other police officers who are now being trained in Kenya will join them in Baidoa. This is the start of what the government hopes will grow to a police force with 12,000 officers. 

In Baidoa the officers will see the problems they will meet in other parts of the country. At least 3,000 militiamen are on the streets of the town and the situation is very tense. Last month the militias killed two World Food Programme guards. Seven men died in an argument over a mobile phone. But Baidoa is peaceful compared with Mogadishu. Probably the world's most dangerous capital city for a foreigner, Mogadishu is a no-go zone for the government too. Two groups are trying to take control of Mogadishu: one is a group of warlords and the other the sharia courts, whose members may include Islamic extremists. 

Both groups have plenty of guns from Yemen and Ethiopia, and both are against the new government because they might lose the money they get from their control of ports, airfields and roadblocks. 'If we send these policemen there now, they will be killed,' says Garad Nur Adbulle, the deputy head of the Armo academy. 'For sure.'

