The capital city of Venezuela, Caracas, has some of the worst traffic jams in the world. The situation is so bad that psychiatrists are now giving advice to drivers about what to do when they are in a traffic jam. The advice includes the following: eat a snack, read a book, do a crossword, listen to music but don't hit or shoot other people!

More and more people own a car in Caracas. Because of this the motorways are blocked and the side-streets are full of cars from early morning until late at night. Sometimes whole districts of the city are completely blocked by cars. Doctors say the situation is making drivers very stressed and that this stress is causing both physical and mental damage. The traffic problems also cause fights between drivers and sometimes people shoot each other.

Some people try to avoid the traffic jams by leaving home at 5 a.m. but this often means that they don't get enough sleep and cannot work properly as a result. They also become bad-tempered because they are tired all the time and this may have a negative effect on their sex lives.

Many people are feeling more and more worried and nervous, Robert Lespinasse, the former head of the Venezuelan Society of Psychiatry, told the daily newspaper Ultimas Noticias. Armed gangs also attack and rob drivers in traffic jams and this makes the situation worse because people are afraid all the time.

There is no easy solution to the problem. Doctors have advised people who are sitting in traffic jams to have a drink or something to eat and occupy their minds with music, a book, newspaper or crossword.

Venezuela has a lot of oil and many people have become rich as a result. Car sales have increased rapidly. Two years ago 150,000 cars were sold. Last year 300,000 were sold. But there are no new roads for the extra traffic so everything travels on old streets full of holes.

The government has a lot of money from the sale of oil. It has started a programme of building bridges and metro lines before the presidential election next month. But many of these bridges and metro lines are still not finished. One of them is a bridge that will connect the centre of Caracas to the airport. This means that drivers have to use an old road. It is only 16 miles from the city to the airport but the journey can take five hours.

Everyone agrees that the traffic jams are getting worse every month. Taxi drivers say they are losing money because they can only make three journeys a day instead of the five journeys they used to make. 'It's impossible. If someone asks to go into especially heavy traffic I say no because I will lose half a day," said Fredy Afanador, a local taxi driver.

The President of Venezuela, Hugo Chavez, has criticised former transport ministers but says the present minister is doing a good job. He is also looking to other countries for help. One idea is to work with the mayor of London, Ken Livingstone. In London, drivers have to pay to enter the centre of the city. This means there is now less traffic. Mr Livingstone will give advice to President Chavez and, in return, Venezuela will sell fuel to London at a cheaper price. Perhaps this idea will help to solve the problem of traffic jams in Caracas.