Many parents won't like it, but a report published today shows young teenagers' favourite reading is Heat magazine. Parents may be happier to see that Anne Frank's diary, books by Anthony Horowitz and CS Lewis' The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe are also in the top ten.

The celebrity gossip and news magazine comes top when 11 to 14-year-olds are asked to name their favourite read. This is followed by teenage girls' magazine Bliss, which comes joint second with reading song lyrics online. They are followed by reading computer game cheats advice online, and then reading your own blog or fan fiction. 

The first books in the list are the Harry Potter series at number five. But not all teenagers agree, because Harry Potter is also number eight in the most hated reading material top ten.

The results are in a report called Read Up, Fed Up: Exploring Teenage Reading Habits in the UK Today, as part of the National Year of Reading, which Gordon Brown set up in January. 

Other books on the favourites list are Anne Frank's diary at number six, Anthony Horowitz novels at eight, the CS Lewis classic at number nine and books by Louise Rennison ? author of the Confessions of Georgia Nicolson series ? in joint tenth place with BBC Online. 

Honor Wilson-Fletcher, director of the National Year of Reading, said she was more interested in the variety of the list than the order. She said that adults read different kinds of things too and not many read serious literature.

Predictably, the most hated read is homework. It is followed by Shakespeare, books of over 100 pages and stories about skinny celebrities in magazines ? although the cover and pages six to 12 of this week's favourite read Heat are all about that. 

Perhaps the amazing success of Facebook may be over, because it is the ninth most hated read, although the report shows a big rise in online reading. Wilson-Fletcher says we should be glad that they read so much online, which earlier generations didn't have the chance to do.

The report also shows that 45% of young teenagers' parents criticize them for reading something they think is bad for them. But Wilson-Fletcher thinks that parents are too critical, and reading is not just about reading books.

The schools minister, Jim Knight, said: 'It is vital that young people have the opportunity to read widely. It is wonderful that 80% of the teenagers surveyed write their own stories and keep up-to-date with current affairs by using sites like BBC Online."
 
The report also shows a big difference between boys and girls. 41% of boys put online computer game cheats as their favourite read, and put online song lyrics second. Nearly a third of boys said they loved reading because it helped them get better at hobbies. 39% of girls said they loved reading because it provided an escape, or quiet time to enjoy on their own. 

Young people were surveyed to find the 20 most loved and 20 most loathed reads. Then teenagers logged on to the teen website Pizco to vote on the lists. 

