In the suburbs around the Argentine capital Buenos Aires you find estates full of expensive houses with gardens and swimming pools. When you look at these rich estates, it is difficult to imagine that just five years ago Argentina was in the middle of an economic crisis. Millions of people lost their jobs and their savings. There was a dramatic increase in violent crime. But today if you visit the suburbs of Buenos Aires you find new cars parked outside expensive houses. To the surprise of many people, the economy of Argentina is growing stronger again.

But there is a problem in these rich estates. They are closed communities protected by high walls and uniformed guards with guns and two-way radios. Argentina has recovered but it is different. More than 400 new estates have been built around Buenos Aires. 300,000 people live in these estates and if you don't live there you have to show ID to a security guard if you want to enter. 

'There are no poor people here. That's one reason why people like it," says Ramiro Figueroa, 30, an estate agent who lives in Tortugas about an hour by car from the centre of Buenos Aires. 'I love it here. Everything is secure. I leave my windows open at night." You can also find closed estates like these in the new South Africa, as the middle classes try to escape from crime in the city centres. People are now worried that Argentina might become a polarized society like South Africa or Brazil.

The economy is stronger now but 40% of the people of Argentina are still poor. You can see this in the shanty towns around Buenos Aires. In the tourist areas you can see beggars sleeping in shop doorways and children beg for money from cars stopping at traffic lights. Many of the people living in the closed estates do not see these things, says Celina Murga, 34, a film director. 'The children who live in these places are very different from others; they don't know what the real world is like." She is making a film about children in the closed estates. 'I want to show that this is a social crisis," says Ms Murga. 

Argentina's economic crisis began in December 2001. At first both the middle class and the poor were angry with the government and the financial institutions. The middle class lost their businesses and the poor lost any savings they had. Everything changed when gangs of criminals started attacking people in rich districts of Buenos Aires. People thought that crime was out of control. Hundreds of thousands of people protested after the kidnap and murder of a young man, Axel Blumberg. When the economy began to recover in 2003, more and more people moved to closed estates. You can see the high walls of these estates when you drive along the 10-lane motorways out of Buenos Aires. 

Foreigners are now buying apartments in central Buenos Aires. They believe that it is a good investment and a good place to live. Europeans and North Americans own about 30% of the properties in the city centre. The economic recovery is a dramatic change from the dark days of 2002. Now the government is more popular and many people feel more confident. But banks, supermarkets and restaurants are still leaving the city centre and moving to the suburbs.
 
People living in the closed estates say that they are happier there than in the city centre. Connie Burgwardt, a 40-year-old lawyer, moved two years ago to Santa Barbara, an estate 16 miles north of the city. She says he has a wonderful social life there. Her parents and her friends live nearby, and every weekend there's a barbecue or party. 'For GBP40,000 I could buy 40 square metres in the city - or 160 here. Here I have a garden and a swimming pool. You don't think twice. It's like a dream ... I won't go away from here unless I'm dead."
