Tuvalu is a tiny country of nine islands in the South Pacific. It has a population of just 11,000. In 1999 it was the third-poorest country in the world. The islanders earned just$1,000 each a year. But then something unusual happened. Tuvalu received an internet domain name - the letters ".tv". These letters were very interesting for many companies around the world.

A communication company from California offered to buy the domain name '.tv" for $40m. For the Tuvalans this was a very large amount of money. The islanders became very rich.

At the same time the islanders received some very bad news. Because of global warming, and because the islands are only 3m above sea level, Tuvalu will probably become the first country in the world that will disappear under the sea. Scientists say that there will be very bad floods during the next 15-20 years and by the end of the century the Tuvalu islands will already be under the sea.

You can already see signs of the rising sea on Tuvalu. There are pools of seawater on the land, some beaches are disappearing and you can see tree roots by the ocean. Cyclones used to be very rare but they now appear a few times a year, and the rains that come with the cyclones cause flooding. 

But despite these problems, the Tuvalans had their new money. They could use it to buy themselves a future. Or at least they could use it to buy some time. Paul Lindsay, a documentary film-maker, took these questions with him all the way to Tuvalu, and came back with an incredible story. As the water rises, the Tuvalans are using the money to develop the land. They are building new houses, planning nightclubs, restaurants and hotels and new cars are driving around on new roads. The residents do not think this is strange: "Just because we are sinking, it doesn't mean we don't want to raise our standards of living," Sam Teo, Tuvalu's minister for natural resources, told Lindsay.

Tuvalu received $40 million for the internet deal and used $10m of it to asphalt the islands' 19km of roads. Before 1999 there were four cars on the islands. The Tuvalans used to walk or cycle everywhere. As well as new cars, the Tuvalans also imported a lot of food and other goods. Now they drive everywhere and eat more food than before.

Now many Tuvalans are fat and suffer from high blood pressure and diabetes.

Other Tuvalans discovered that it was too expensive for them to keep their cars, and that anyway cars are not really necessary in a country that is just 26 sq km in area. There is now a huge rubbish dump in the middle of this tropical paradise, full of old cars and other waste. 

The Tuvalans also spent large amounts of money telling the world about their situation. Tuvalu joined the United Nations, at a cost of $1.5m a year. The Tuvalan delegation at the United Nations was especially active in supporting the Kyoto protocol to fight global warming. But while the political system argues about global warming, the sea keeps rising, and the Tuvalans keep spending their dollars.

All Tuvalans know that they will probably not die of old age on their islands. The solution to the problem is not so simple, however. They cannot move to the nearby island of Kioa, because it will not take any more immigrants. Australia doesn't want to let the Tuvalans in, and New Zealand will only take a small number each year. When the islands are finally covered in water, the Tuvalan nation will probably be split up.

After the eight months he spent in Tuvalu, Lindsay is not sentimental about white sands and turquoise waters. "There are no more paradises. Tuvalu is trying to keep its sense of social solidarity in the face of progress. Nowadays even paradise has a price".

