Dmitry Medvedev is the new president of Russia. He is the third president since the end of the Soviet Union. Medvedev became president at a ceremony at the Kremlin which ended Vladimir Putin's eight years in power. Standing next to Mr Putin, Medvedev gave a speech in which he promised to improve the lives of ordinary Russians, fight corruption and strengthen the law. He said: 'I'm going to pay special attention to the basic role of the law. We must have true respect for the law and we must remove those problems with the law which are preventing the modern development of our country." He also promised to make life 'comfortable, confident and secure" for ordinary Russians.

Medvedev also praised Mr Putin. People expect that Medvedev will name Putin as Russia's new prime minister and head of the government. 'I would like to thank Vladimir Putin for his personal support, which I have always had," he said. Putin and Medvedev will probably run Russia together - and Putin will probably still have a lot of power as prime minister of Russia in his new prime ministerial office in Russia's White House.

Putin arrived at the Kremlin palace first. He walked along a long red carpet in front of 2,400 important guests and diplomats. Medvedev, a small man, arrived in the Kremlin's huge gold Andreyevsky Hall next and nervously stared at his feet. Afterwards both men stood together side by side in the Kremlin's cold, windy palace courtyard. Aged just 42, and the youngest Russian leader for more than a hundred years, Medvedev now faces a series of problems - both at home and abroad.

One of the biggest problems for the new president is how to stop Russia's rising inflation - which is around 12% or more. Another problem is that people are angry about the rising costs of food and utilities. Medvedev also has several foreign policy problems. He has to decide what to do about the region of Abkhazia, where Russia has a disagreement with Georgia, and he has to negotiate a new co-operation and partnership agreement with the European Union.

Medvevev has announced that his first foreign trips will be to China and Kazakhstan. But one of his first tasks will be to try to have good relations with the next president of the United States - and improve Moscow's problematic relationship with Washington.

Some experts say that Medvedev's biggest problem is to stop the Kremlin's powerful military intelligence group from moving against him. Medvedev - a former St Petersburg lawyer - was never in the KGB, whose ex-members have a lot of power in the Russian government. Putin was in the KGB and had a good relationship with these people. 'He has got enough problems to make his hair go grey," says Sam Greene, an expert at the Moscow Carnegie Centre. 

The question is who will be the real leader of Russia, the new president or the new prime minister? Medvedev or Putin? Greene says: 'The current situation will probably continue, so Putin will be the person that everyone talks to. This government is flexible and has informal power relations. I don't think this is going to change in the future. Putin was different from Boris Yeltsin because he was able to make different factions inside the ruling class agree. This isn't something that's written in the constitution and you can't easily pass this to Medvedev," he said.

Political analysts cannot agree whether Putin is planning to return as president in 2012, or whether he is planning to disappear gradually from politics. Russia's constitution says that Putin had to step down after two four-year terms as president. But there is nothing to stop him returning after a four-year break. Today Putin said that he had followed the law - even though many powerful people in the government wanted him to change the law and continue as president. 'I said I would work openly and honestly, to faithfully serve the people and the state. And I did not break my promise," he said in a short speech.

Meanwhile, Medvedev's promise to turn Russia into a society based on law is an interesting one. Yesterday, the authorities banned an anti-government demonstration in Moscow by supporters of The Other Russia movement, even though the constitution says that people have the right to protest.
 
'MPs earn 40 times more than our pensions. We have to live on 4,000 roubles (GBP88) a month," said Zoya Vasilyevna, a 77-year-old retired teacher at the demonstration. 'My generation defended this country in the war, but now these people have stolen everything. 'Putin only likes billionaires. He's not interested in us," she said.
