International aid agencies work in many countries. They help poor people, sick people and people who have difficult lives.

At the moment the situation in Iraq is very dangerous for the international aid agencies. Because of this many have already left Iraq. Many more will leave in the next few days. Now there are only a few which are operating there. 

Recently armed men kidnapped four aid workers from their office in Baghdad. Two of the aid workers were Italian women. This is the first time that militants have attacked aid agencies and the first time they have kidnapped women. Many people now believe that all the remaining aid workers will now leave Iraq because of this kidnapping. 

Jean-Dominique Bunel, an aid agency worker, said in an interview with a French press agency: "Most international organisations are preparing to leave Iraq and some foreign workers have already left." He said he did not know who had kidnapped the Italians who work for an organisation called Bridge to Baghdad, which helps Iraqi children.

An Iraqi group called Ansar al-Zawahri said it had kidnapped the women. In a message on an Islamist website, it said: "This is the first of our attacks against Italy." The name of the group may have a connection with Osama bin Laden's deputy, Ayman al-Zawahri.

The security situation in Iraq is getting worse and almost all the main aid organisations, including the United Nations and the International Red Cross have now left the country. The people who are still in Iraq now have to think very carefully about the situation after the latest kidnapping. Twenty armed men ran into the organisation's office in central Baghdad and kidnapped the four aid workers. 

The Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, said he was "shocked and surprised" that the kidnappers had attacked women because "the Islamic religion protects women". Some Italian politicians, who were against the war in Iraq, said that the most important thing was to save the lives of the hostages. 

The kidnapping in Baghdad happened 10 days after the murder of the Italian journalist Enzo Baldoni. Militants kidnapped Mr Baldoni while he was travelling to Najaf with the Italian Red Cross. Italy did not accept the kidnappers' demands for its troops to leave Iraq, so the militants killed Mr Baldoni. 

Another militant group released a video. The video shows men wearing masks cutting off the head of a Turkish lorry driver. They kidnapped the driver while he was taking goods to an American army base in Mosul in the north of Iraq. 

Militants also kidnapped two Australian hostages. The Australian prime minister, John Howard, said he would not withdraw Australian troops from Iraq as a result of the kidnapping.