The three-course lunch is a French tradition, a sign of civilized eating. While the English eat sandwiches at their desks, well-fed French workers have always enjoyed their lunch at a local restaurant. But times are changing. The traditional French three-course restaurant lunch is in danger of disappearing for ever because of the world economic crisis. About 3,000 traditional French restaurants, cafes and bars went bust in the first three months of 2008 and trade unions are predicting that more will close as people worry about money. The number of French restaurants going bust rose by 25% from last year, and the number of cafes closing rose by 56%.

A well-known French food writer, Francois Simon, said yesterday that French consumers did not want to spend money. He said this had changed national eating habits and was pushing restaurant owners towards bankruptcy. Diners were now skipping the traditional aperitif, avoiding starters, drinking tap water, not having wine or coffee and - at most - sharing a pudding.

Even the city's smartest restaurants were getting impatient with smaller orders. In one restaurant near Paris' Gare de Lyon, he reported, an angry restaurant owner asked two couples to leave because they did not want to order starters. The restaurant chain Hippopotamus is now offering discounts to regular customers and special-offer hamburgers, which are now more popular than French steak dishes. Office workers now prefer to buy take-away baguettes and supermarket lunches.

As problems in the French economy continue, low salaries and rising food prices are worrying for many French people. Regular TV reports show people eating cheap tinned vegetables or looking through bins at markets for food. The restaurant sector has had the third highest number of bankruptcies in France this year, after the construction and building industries, according to one credit insurance group.

The time French people spend eating meals in restaurants has already gone down: in 1975, a lunch out took an average of one and a half hours. By 2005, it was 32 minutes. Daniele Deleval, of the French restaurant and hotel union, said: 'We're very worried. Since the start of the year, the number of restaurant customers has dropped, on average, 20% and we're seeing no signs of improvement."

Jean Guillaume, owner of Le Bouquet restaurant on Boulevard Haussmann in Paris' smart 8th district, said: 'In the past, lunch customers ordered a main course, dessert, coffee and a bottle of wine. Now they're just having a main course with tap water, and not ordering the rest. We had 75 customers this lunchtime, but no-one ordered a bottle of wine ... It's the end of a tradition of going out for lunch and it looks like numbers will be this low for two to three years." The nearby baker's shop, however, was busy selling take-away baguettes, and there were long queues outside at midday.

It was a bad summer for restaurant and bar owners, with fewer international tourists visiting Paris, especially American and Japanese visitors. And in Toulouse, cafe owners complained that customers were trying to make one drink last as long as possible. Even in French holiday destinations, like Arcachon in the west or the Cote d'Azur in the south, restaurant owners said business was down by at least 10%.