Prince Charles will be the next king of England. He is also a businessman and a champion of the environment. And now he is probably also the poshest greengrocer in Britain. Charles has opened a shop called Highgrove (the name of his country estate) on the main high street of his local town, Tetbury. It is the latest in the prince's list of businesses, which have earned millions of pounds in profit over the last few years.

In the Highgrove shop, the prince will sell everything from fresh vegetables from his country estate to apple juice from his wife Camilla's orchards in nearby Wiltshire. There will be jams, jellies, chutneys, honeys and mustards, as well as handmade biscuits and chocolates. But the thousands of visitors, tourists and shoppers that will come to his store should not expect to find cheap prices. For example, a vase marking the prince's 60th birthday later this year costs GBP395. You could also spend GBP30 on a pair of gardening gloves or for GBP45 you could buy a bird box. The best thing to buy might be a collection of Prince Charles's drawings which costs just GBP6.95.

A small crowd came to the official opening. Charles and Camilla also came but there was no official ceremony. The royal couple chatted to the staff, met a few local people and had a look round the shop. 'He doesn't really look like a shopkeeper, does he?" said Steve Gray, one of the people in the crowd. 'Why is he doing this? He doesn't need the money and a member of the royal family running a shop seems a bit strange." 

Some people might think the prince is doing it to promote the Prince Charles brand name. Others say that Highgrove in Tetbury is the first one of a chain of stores. Members of Charles's staff say that this is not true ? but they do say that he is thinking of exporting some of the food he produces on his estate. 

The advance publicity says that the shop reflects Charles's interests. So the first things that the visitor sees when he or she enters the shop are chinaware and stationery designed by a student at the prince's School of Traditional Arts in East London. And the wooden boxes for storing the chutney are made by people learning skills in one of the projects Charles supports. But for most people the highlight is probably the organic vegetables. There is no greengrocer in Tetbury so the people of the town are very excited that they will be able to buy Charles's vegetables at his new shop. 

The prince's florist, Sarah Champier-Lowe, said: 'When people came to the shop before the official opening they were most interested in the vegetables." In truth, the vegetable prices were not so expensive. A bunch of organic leeks from Highgrove costs GBP1.35. A bunch of leeks from the Netherlands was GBP1.10 in the supermarket opposite.

Members of the prince's staff say that any profits from the shop will go to the prince's Charities Foundation, which manages the money which his social enterprises generate. Most shopkeepers in Tetbury welcomed the new business. A few metres from Charles's shop, David Herbert, who has a food and drinks shop, said: 'Everybody tells me my business is going to suffer. It's not ? it's good for the town. We will all benefit. The shop will bring more visitors to the town." Chocolate shop owner Hortensia Oates looked at the prices of the food in Charles's shop. 'I must say that his prices are quite competitive," she said.

Butcher John Newman sells beef from Charles's estate. 'This will bring more people to the town so that's good for us." The shopkeepers don't want to criticize their royal neighbour ? this town likes the royal family. When Charles and Camilla left the shop yesterday, Camilla shook hands with people in the crowd ? and recommended the shop. 'It's got some lovely things," she said. The prince was busy looking at another shop, the Chef's Table. 'I hear it's good," he said to one of the local people. 'It's not as good as your shop," she replied. In places like Tetbury, it is best to have a good relationship with members of the royal family.
