Many famous people, including American talk show host Oprah Winfrey and Nelson Mandela, have given millions of dollars to help South African orphans and street children. They gave the money to the woman who cared for them and called her the 'Angel of Soweto". The children she helped called her Mama Jackie.

The children talked about the terrible lives they were living. Their parents were dead. They had to work as prostitutes to get money to buy food for their younger brothers and sisters. When they heard these terrible stories, many people gave a lot of money to Mama Jackie Maarohanye and her Ithuteng Trust school. The school gave the poor orphans and street children somewhere to live and it also gave them an education. Oprah Winfrey gave the school $1m during a visit last year, and organisations like the US National Basketball Association also donated a lot of money. 'I think Mama Jackie is an angel on earth," said Winfrey. 

But now the school is closed. Winfrey, together with Mr Mandela and Bill Clinton, has asked for copies of a South African television film that says Ms Maarohanye told pupils to make up stories about murdered parents and poverty in order to get money. The film also says that the money people gave for the children's education was missing and that they had very little to eat. 

The television film was called Carte Blanche. It showed that pupils who said their parents were dead are now living with them, and that those who said they were living on the streets never left home. 45 children from the Ithuteng school travelled to the US five years ago as guests of Bill and Hillary Clinton. One of the group said they had to go to the United Nations and tell false stories about their lives. 'We went to the United Nations and [Ms Maarohanye] told us to cry ... she told us to cry more than the other days we were crying," said the student. 

Carte Blanche first filmed at the school five years ago and went back to talk to some of the same children. Many said their stories were not true. In 2001 Lebogang Makheta said that both her parents were killed in political violence. 'Someone killed my mother with a spear and shot my father," she said. Now Lebogang says that wasn't true. 

'Mama Jackie told me what to say when they asked me questions. She said my answers would help to get money for the school", says Lebongang. She also told the programme in 2001 that she used drugs and knew gangsters. 'None of that was true. It was all lies, just lies," she now says.
 
Lebogang's mother, Phyllis Makheta, went to the school and was surprised when they told her that her daughter was an orphan. 'I was there in the school. I don't understand English very well, but I asked Jackie, why these children are crying and saying they are orphans, but we [their parents] are here. She said: Don't worry, it is a play." 

Five years ago Lindiwe Thusi told Carte Blanche that she saw her father's body with his head cut off. She now says: 'Mama Jackie gave us a piece of paper with those words written on it." When different people came we had to start crying and tell that whole story," she told Carte Blanche. Lindiwe says her father is alive and in the army. She also said that she told lies when she said she worked as a prostitute to earn money to feed her sisters.

Ms Maarohanye did not want to answer questions but she told Carte Blanche that she had not done anything wrong. But she couldn't explain why she told the programme Lebogang Makheta's parents were dead or that Lindiwe Thusi's father had been killed. She said she never forced students to repeat false stories. 'I never pushed a child. I have never put a gun on a child's neck. I have never done that. You can never prove that I have done that."
 
The children's stories brought money from around the world. Some of the money was to pay for their studies at colleges and universities. But three years ago some organisations, including a large bank and a hotel group, stopped giving money to the Ithuteng Trust when they heard that the money was not reaching the students or their colleges. Several former Ithuteng students say they had to leave their higher education courses because there was no money to pay for their education. Some students had so little money they had to live on bread.

The chairman of the Ithuteng Trust board, Joseph Kganakga, says the news is a nightmare and he is angry and disappointed. He has resigned from the board, together with two other board members who said they now had no confidence in Ms Maarohanye.
