Cloning is copying an animal or a human to make another animal or human which is exactly the same. Scientists take DNA from one egg and put it into another egg. This then makes a copy which is exactly the same as the first egg. The first cloned animal was a sheep but scientists have also cloned mice, rats, rabbits, horses and evena mule. Now, for the first time, they say they have also cloned a human embryo, the small egg that eventually becomes a baby. 

South Korean and American scientists say they have cloned human embryos and taken cells called stem cells from one of them. Stem cells are very important in the development of an unborn baby. They change a single fertilised human egg into about 10 trillion cells during a nine month pregnancy. 

The Korean and US scientists used 242 eggs from 16 women to clone 30 blastocysts. A blatocyst is the tiny ball of cells that together become an embryo. Then the scientists took the original DNA out of the egg, and replaced it with chromosomes from an adult cell. "This is not a human clone," said Donald Kennedy, a leading biologist. This research could lead to treatments for long-term diseases such as diabetes, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. 

American politicians do not allow US government money to be used for stem cell research. Dr Kennedy said he hoped that now they would change their decision. But the White House said that President George Bush is against stem cell research. Leon Kass, chairman of the president's council on bioethics said "The age of human cloning has arrived. Today we have cloned blastocysts for medical research, tomorrow we will have cloned blastocysts for baby-making.". 

Scientists have been working on cloning research for many years and hope that their research will help to treat many different diseases. Now that they have cloned stem cells, they will have to find out how to change these cells into human tissue. They will then be able to use this tissue to treat diseases. In the long term, some scientists believe it could be possible to grow complete human organs, such as livers or kidneys. 

Many people are against stem cell research and cloning. They say that it will lead to human cloning and cloned babies. The first stages of cloning for use in medical treatment and cloning to produce a cloned baby are exactly the same. 

