In a sports hall in a small town outside Bordeaux, a crowd of more than 1,000 fans suddenly jumped up, arms waving, and began stamping and clapping to a popular Italian second world war song: 'Bella, ciao! Bella, ciao! Bella, ciao, ciao, ciao!" At the back of the hall, smiling warmly, appeared 'La Bella', Segolene Royal.

Royal, the 53-year-old mother of four and head of the regional government in Poitou-Charentes, is now very popular. She is the only MP among the top 50 most-loved personalities in France, with her picture in all France's celebrity magazines. They love her personal success story: she was the shy teenage daughter of a strict Catholic army colonel who punished his children brutally and thought women should stay at home like his wife; now she is fighting against French male chauvinism. 

Royal doesn't agree that only men should rule the French left. She has stopped helping the older men who run the socialist party - 'les elephants". She now has her own movement, Desirs d'Avenir - 'Wishes for the Future", and an army of loyal supporters. They believe that she alone can save France from the poverty and terrible social inequalities of 12 years under President Jacques Chirac.

France certainly has problems. Lots of young people are unemployed, and violent crime is increasing. Last year, teenagers rioted against racism in the poor immigrant suburbs, and many are afraid it will happen again. Nicolas Sarkozy, the centre-right interior minister who would also like to be president, is openly trying to attract the far-right with his strict immigration policies.

Royal's huge popular support makes her seem the only possible Socialist president. But the elephants don't agree. They say she is inexperienced, and her popularity cannot last. 'It is going to be nasty," admits one Royal supporter. 

Like the last Socialist president, Francois Mitterrand, who she once worked for, Royal is hoping to get support from the provinces. She visits them, promising to give more power to the regions. In one village, more than 200 wine-makers who may lose their vines as Europe tries to reduce its wine-lake were very impressed. The old ladies lined up to kiss her and be photographed with her. 

'It's all about the people," she smiled between meetings in Bordeaux. I asked her what kept her going: 'My need to rise to the challenge of the trust that the people, the country, has given me." 

At the exclusive Ecole National d'Administration, where the French ruling class are trained, Royal was in the same class as the prime minister, Dominique de Villepin. There, too, she met her partner, Francois Hollande. Later, she worked in the ministries of education, environment, family and childhood, while he became Socialist party leader in 2002. They have four children but have never married. 

For months, people criticized Royal for having no clear policies, and just talking vaguely about family values and public morals. Now she is explaining her plans to modernise France, but, like Mitterrand, her opinions seem both right and left. She annoyed the left by suggesting a form of military service for difficult teenagers, and criticising the Socialists' popular 35-hour working week. However, she strongly supports trade unions, and has promised to ban genetically modified food. Unlike the rest of her party, she admires Tony Blair, but she is against the war in Iraq. 'My diplomatic policy would not consist of going and kneeling in front of George Bush," she has said. 

'The Socialist party in France has been a clique of men, cut off from the population." says MEP Gilles Savary, part of Royal's inner circle. Royal is promising to speak for ordinary people in a society where those in power don't listen to them. She has also promised, 'Power won't change me." But many outside the Segosphere still wonder who Royal really is, and what won't be changing.

