Susan McDonald drives a nice car, wears smart clothes and during office hours is the neighbourhood personal banker. But after work McDonald has another life. It is then that the mother of three children turns into a neighbourhood organizer, encouraging people in her community to fight for a way of life that many believe is in danger.

McDonald is president of the Franklin Reserve Neighbourhood Association in the city of Elk Grove, 15 miles south of the Californian capital, Sacramento. Franklin Reserve is a collection of large houses on cul-de-sacs with unusual names - Snow Leopard Circle, Fox Trotter Way. Here, McDonald and her neighbours are fighting for their suburban way of life.

The mortgage foreclosure crisis, along with rising fuel prices and other factors such as more people moving back to towns and cities, could mean the end for the suburbs. Newspapers have already started talking about 'slumburbia'.

At Franklin Reserve, a walled community of 15,000 people, there are signs that all is not well. Some front lawns are overgrown and untidy, and there are many 'for sale' signs and signs offering houses for rent. On Caprezzo Way a five-bedroom, three-bathroom house, with swimming pool, is on sale for $550,000, probably $100,000 less than a year ago. Across the street another sign is taped to the gate of a house on Cortino Way. It says 'Notice to quit,' and tells the occupants, who couldn't pay their mortgage, that they have three days to leave.

Susan McDonald moved to Elk Grove four years ago. She wanted a new home in a new location, with good schools and a friendly, family-oriented community - she wanted the perfect suburban life. But when the mortgage crisis started, McDonald began to notice changes.

'I took my kids for a walk in the park and saw some graffiti," she says. Soon after, McDonald and seven others decided to start a neighbourhood association. Today, the group has 400 members, a lawn-mowing task force, and a lively online message board.

But long grass is only one of suburbia's problems, according to Christopher Leinberger. He says that the end of suburbia is in sight. 'For 50 years we left the city and headed to the suburbs. Now people are moving back to the cities, helped by the high gas prices, currently $4 per gallon gas."

The move back to the towns and cities has also been helped by other changes, says Leinberger. People are having children later in life, so they don't need a suburban house with five bedrooms and a huge garden. Many house buyers also prefer to be able to walk to where they want to go; in suburbia they have to drive everywhere. 

'19% of household costs go on transport. A hundred years ago it was only 3%," says Leinberger. 'At some point this country has to get serious about reducing carbon emissions." 

But what worries urban theorists is what might happen to places like Franklin Reserve when people can no longer afford to live there. 'These areas are custom-made for people to live in," says Leinberger. 'It's not easy to turn them into shops or offices or hotels."

