The Italian opera star Luciano Pavarotti died at his home in Modena aged 71. The tenor, who helped take opera to a new audience, was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer last year. His manager, Terri Robson, said Pavarotti died at 5am on September 6. 'The maestro fought a long, tough battle against the pancreatic cancer which eventually took his life. He remained positive until the end," Mr Robson said.

Pavarotti made his professional debut in 1961, as Rodolfo in Puccini's La Boheme at the opera house in Reggio Emilia. His most celebrated performance came at New York's Metropolitan Opera House where he hit nine high Cs in Donizetti's La fille du regiment.

But Pavarotti reached a new global audience during the 1990 football World Cup when his interpretation of the Puccini aria Nessun Dorma was chosen as the tournament's theme tune. It became an international hit. Later the Essential Pavarotti became the first classical album to reach number 1 in the UK charts.

The 1990 World Cup was also the venue of the first of the hugely popular Three Tenor concerts that Pavarotti performed with Placido Domingo and Jose Carreras. His most high-profile performance in Britain was the Pavarotti in the Park concert in a rainy Hyde Park in 1991. His friend, Diana, Princess of Wales, was in the front row.

Like many opera stars, Pavarotti also had a reputation for being difficult. At a Royal Variety performance in Edinburgh he demanded a fully-fitted kitchen to be built into his hotel suite. He also frequently cancelled concerts at short notice.But he also raised millions of pounds in a number of charity performances.

Domingo led the tributes to his fellow tenor. 'I always admired the God-given glory of his voice," he said. 'I also loved his wonderful sense of humour. We had so much fun during our concerts with Jose Carreras."

The British tenor Russell Watson said that Pavarotti was the man who brought opera to the people. 'The World Cup was the Three Tenors led by Pavarotti, with a very entertaining version of Nessun Dorma, in fact, it's now called 'Pavarotti's Nessun Dorma'," Watson said. 'His voice was so distinctive you only needed to listen to a couple of bars and you knew it was him, he had incredible power and control."

Another tenor Ian Bostridge agreed. 'He was an old-fashioned star," he said. 'Vocally he was the best.

In a statement, the Royal Opera House said: 'He introduced the extraordinary power of opera to people who perhaps would never have encountered opera and classical singing [and] in doing so he enriched their lives."

Pavarotti gave farewell performances at the Royal Opera House in January 2002. 'The applause on those evenings was probably the most moving and heartfelt in the history of the Royal Opera," the statement said. 'He had a unique ability to touch people with the emotional and brilliant quality of his voice. He was a man with a most extraordinary gift. He will be missed by millions of people."