Last week the Vatican published a 37-page document about women in society. The author of the document was Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, the most important theologian in the Vatican. In the document, Cardinal Ratzinger writes about the typical characteristics of women. He says that women have the same positive characteristics as the Virgin Mary. 

According to the cardinal, women are humble, faithful and welcoming and they know how to listen, how to praise and how to wait. 

The document is an official Vatican statement, so it is probable that the Pope himself read it and perhaps made some changes to it. Many people will probably disagree with some of the things the document says. For example, it says that the fact that women can give birth to children has an effect on their personality. Women have the ability to give life so they are able to help others to grow and are able to protect them. 

The document is called the Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic Church on the Collaboration of Men and Women in the Church and in the World. In the document Cardinal Ratzinger also attacks ideas that are not good for "the true progress of women". One of these ideas, he says, is the belief that some people think women are less important than men. This idea causes problems, he says, because it seems to mean that if women want to be equal they must become enemies of men. Ideas like this could have a negative effect on the structure of the family, according to the cardinal. 

The cardinal says that in this "war" between the sexes, the differences between men and women are becoming less and less clear. But the fact that women can give birth is a very important one, he says. This means that women become mature very quickly and are serious and responsible in their lives. Because of this they should be "present in the world of work and in the organisation of society". 

The document received a mixed reaction from feminists and women writers. Erin Pizzey, the founder of the international women's refuge movement, said: "Catholic priests and bishops cannot marry so I don't think the Catholic Church should make statements like this." 

But Catherine Pepinster, the editor of the British Catholic journal The Tablet, said many women would understand the feelings in the document. "It is typical of feminists to criticise this document without thinking. The document looks at differences between the sexes, but it also says that women have a big role to play in society." 