Last week the trial ended of 17 Portuguese women who were accused of having abortions at an illegal clinic. The nurse who ran the clinic was sent to prison but only one of the 17 women was found guilty. 

Sandra Cardoso, 21, said that she went to the illegal clinic in Maia three years ago because she was very poor, her partner was violent and her daughter was sick. She was ordered to pay a small fine or spend four months in prison. The maximum possible sentence for this crime was three years in prison. 

The nurse who ran the clinic was called Maria do Ceu. She was sentenced to eight-and-a-half years in prison. Three of those years were for breaking the very strict abortion laws in this strongly Roman Catholic country. The other five and a half years were for stealing morphine and other dangerous drugs from a hospital. The panel of three judges said: "We understand the political, social and scientific questions in this case, but we must follow the law." The trial was held in a large tent at the tennis club in the town of Maia, because the law court was not big enough. 

Supporters of the accused women were both happy and angry. "We are glad for these women, because none of them will go to jail now," said Silvestrina Silva, of the Right to Choice group. "But it is terrible that they were put on trial. The trial shows that illegal abortions in this country are a fact, and that people are still punished for having abortions in this country," she said. Dina Nunes, a psychologist, said: " This is the 21st century, but women in Portugal still do not have the right to decide what they do with their own bodies and lives." 

Women who became pregnant in Maia or nearby Oporto and did not have enough money to travel to abortion clinics in Spain were told about the secret clinic by hospital personnel, chemists, taxi drivers or their own friends or relatives. The pregnant women had to pay $450 for the operation but none of them had enough money. They all left items of jewellery - wedding rings, necklaces or earrings . while they tried to find the rest of the money. 

The case divided Portuguese public opinion. Most of the women come from very poor districts. All of them were arrested because of the jewellery they gave the nurse who ran the clinic. "They are all poor. If they had money, they would have gone to Spain or somewhere else," said Ms Silva, whose group helped to organise international support for the Maia women. 

Supporters say the women are victims. "There is evidence that pregnancy is a significant factor in suicides in young people," said Milice Ribeiro, a psychologist. 

Some people demanded a new abortion law for Portuguese women last week, saying that the current law was ignored by almost 40,000 women who visited illegal clinics every year. Duarte Vilar, the director of Portugal's Family Planning Association, said: "Illegal abortions have caused a number of deaths and thousands of hospital admissions. We must treat this as a matter of public health." 