Two prisoners have escaped from a jail in New Jersey, USA. The escape was just like the ones people see in the movies. The men left a handwritten note for their guard, which said: 'Thank you for the tools we needed. You're a real friend! Happy holidays." They also signed it with a smiley face.

The prisoners escaped from a high-security section of the jail using just a thick metal wire and a metal wheel used to turn off water pipes. The escape showed that the men had a detailed knowledge of Hollywood prison films, an ability to squeeze through very small holes like Houdini, and an ability to jump off high buildings.

Police are still searching for Jose Espinosa, 20, and Otis Blunt, 32, as details of their escape from Union County jail become known. They began by using the wire to remove the cement around a concrete block in the wall between their two cells, B310 and B311. After removing the block, Blunt squeezed his 1.79-metre (5ft 9in) (11?st) body through a 20cm by 40cm hole into Espinosa's cell. From there, Espinosa, who is 1.67 metres tall (5ft 5in) and 10st 10lb, and Blunt both squeezed through a similar hole from Espinosa's cell into the area outside the high-security section.

Prison officials said the men used the heavy metal wheel to break up the concrete blocks. They then put the small pieces of concrete in the plastic boxes they used to store their personal possessions. Then, just like in the movies, they put posters of women in bikinis over the holes.

The prisoners filled their beds with pillows so the prison guards would think they were still asleep. When they had got out of Espinosa's cell, they jumped from a roof 10 metres high. There was no blood on the ground, which probably means they were not injured.

After that, they had to climb an eight-metre razor-wire fence, but this wasn't a problem for them either. Police found tracks in the snow which showed that they split up and walked in opposite directions along a railway line.

This was the second time Blunt had tried to escape from prison using the wire method. The first time another prisoner told the prison authorities about his plan and they moved him to a more secure part of the prison.

Blunt was in prison before going on trial for robbery and shooting at a corner shop. Espinosa was the driver in a drive-by shooting in New Jersey and was facing a jail sentence of at least 17 years.

A reward of $8,000 has been offered for the men's recapture, and a full inquiry ordered into prison security. A local prosecutor, Ted Romankow, does not like the Hollywood connection. 'I think this is a very serious situation," he told reporters at a press conference. 'I really prefer not to compare it with any movie, although I can understand why you want to do that because it is certainly very similar to some of them." Then, changing his previous position, he added: 'Except in The Shawshank Redemption they had a better poster on the wall."