In 1991 there was violence between young men and police in the suburbs of the French city of Lyon. Alain Touraine, the French sociologist, said, "In a few years we will have the same kind of problems the Americans have in their big cities." In the past few weeks there have been many nights of violence in the suburbs of French cities. Perhaps Touraine's pessimistic prediction is now becoming reality.

The violence followed the deaths of two young Muslim men of African origin in a Paris suburb. The two men lived in Clichy-sous-Bois, a poor northeastern suburb of Paris, and this was where the violent riots began. Clichy-sous-Bois was like a time-bomb waiting to explode. Half its inhabitants are under 20, the unemployment rate is more than 40% and police check the identity of young men regularly. 

Young French citizens born into first- and second-generation immigrant communities from France's former colonies in North Africa usually lead the riots. The cause is almost always the deaths of young black men at the hands of the police. The reaction of the French government usually makes things worse. 

Four days after the deaths in Clichy-sous-Bois, the situation was beginning to calm down when the police fired teargas into a mosque. The official reason for the police action was that there was a badly parked car in front of the mosque. The government has not offered any apology to the Muslim community. But riots have now started in other poor suburbs across France and this is something new. Laurent Levy, an anti-racist campaigner, is not surprised by the situation. "When you do not give any respect to large sections of the population, and when they do not have the right to work and the right to proper accommodation, what is surprising is not that the cars are burning but that it doesn't happen more often," he says. 

Police violence and racism are major factors in the riots. In April a report by the human rights group Amnesty International criticized the way in which the French police treated young men of African origin during identity checks. But the actions of the interior minister, Nicolas Sarkozy, have also caused a lot of anger. He called the rioters "vermin" and "scum" and said it was necessary to clean the suburbs with industrial cleaner. 

Sarkozy's will probably be a candidate in the French presidential elections in 2007 where his opponent will be the current Prime Minister, Dominique de Villepin. Sarkozy's words might gain him votes from right-wing voters.

What can France do to stop the violence? It would obviously help if ministers stopped talking about "scum" and if Sarkozy lost his job. A simple 'sorry" could help to make the situation less tense. The morning after the gassing of the mosque, a young Muslim woman expressed what many people feel, "We just want them to stop lying and to apologize." Then some of these young people might feel they were full and equal citizens of the French republic.

Naima Bouteldja is a French journalist and researcher for the Transnational Institute. 

