Anorexia and bulimia are both illnesses where people have problems with eating problems known as eating disorders. People who suffer from anorexia do not eat enough food and they soon become very thin. People who suffer from bulimia eat a large amount of food but they usually vomit after eating it. Both these eating disorders can be very dangerous for your health.

The former deputy prime minister of the United Kingdom, John Prescott, has published his autobiography. In the book he says that he suffered from bulimia for twenty years. He says that the stress of political life made him eat large amounts of food and then force himself to throw up. He says he began suffering from bulimia in the 1980s, when he was under a lot of stress in his work as a politician. He suffered from bulimia during his time as a member of the government, eating large amounts of burgers, chocolate, crisps and fish and chips. But he now says he has been free of the problem for more than a year.

"I'm sure it was a question of stress," he wrote in the Sunday Times newspaper. "I wasn't doing it all the time, and sometimes I didn't do it for weeks and months, but when I had too much work to do I use to eat a lot and then throw up." He added: "I've never told anyone before. Probably because I was ashamed or embarrassed - or just because it's such a strange thing for someone like me to suffer from. People normally associate eating disorders with young women - anorexic girls, models trying to stay thin, or women in stressful situations, like Princess Diana." 

He also said he used to eat sweet things and Chinese food when life became stressful. "I could drink a whole tin of condensed milk, just for the taste, stupid things like that. And when I went to Mr Chu's in Hull, my favourite Chinese restaurant in the whole world ... I could eat everything on the menu."

Prescott tried to hide the illness from his wife but she realized what was happening. "I could see the signs in the toilet and a lot of food was missing." She told him to see a doctor and a consultant finally told him he was suffering from bulimia. "I arrived at the consultant's and his waiting room was full of young women. I was the only man there. I felt like an idiot. Luckily none of the women told the newspapers about me." In the book, he also says that although he preferred food to alcohol, he would sometimes drink because of stress and to let people know how bad he was feeling.

"Once or twice a year, when I was absolutely exhausted, I used to get out a bottle of vodka and put it on my desk. The people in the office hated it when they saw what was happening. They knew I'd drink it really quickly and finish the whole bottle. But that was very rare." 

The charity Beat, which helps people with eating disorders, said Prescott's decision to talk about his illness was very brave. "It will help other people to realize that men can suffer from eating disorders, and you can get help and treatment even if you have been ill for a very long time," said the charity's chief executive, Susan Ringwood. "It is a brave thing to do because people often feel ashamed and find it difficult to talk about, even to family members." 

80% of new cases of eating disorders are girls and young women aged between 12 and 20 but boys and men also suffer. "Even some doctors don't believe it can affect a boy or a man," said Ringwood. "Anybody can have this illness, including the well-known," she said. "People shouldn't be ashamed or embarrassed if they have an eating disorder." 

Dr Ty Glover, a consultant psychiatrist and expert on eating disorders, said Prescott was very brave to talk about his eating problems. He added: "It's difficult for a young girl to say she has an eating disorder, but for a well-known male politician who is nearly 70 years old, it's especially difficult." Glover said he had never before heard of a man of Prescott's age with bulimia. "It makes me think that maybe there are a large number of middle-aged men who are too frightened to tell anyone they have a problem. "I hope they will stop suffering in silence and seek treatment."

It is believed that there are more than one million people in Britain with an eating disorder such as bulimia or anorexia. 90% of these people are women.
