The Coen brothers' brutal thriller No Country For Old Men won the Oscars for best director and best film at the 80th Academy Awards in Los Angeles last Sunday.

Javier Bardem also won the best supporting actor Oscar for his role as the hitman Anton Chigurh in the same film. And, in a triumphant night for the film, its directors Ethan and Joel Coen won the Oscar for best adapted screenplay.

In a night of few surprises, Daniel Day-Lewis won the Oscar for best actor for his portrayal of an oil prospector in There Will Be Blood. He accepted his award on his knees from Helen Mirren who won the best actress Oscar last year for her portrayal of the British Queen.

There was a British feeling to much of the evening, with six Oscars going to British nominees. British actress, Tilda Swinton won the award for best actress in a supporting role for her performance in the legal thriller Michael Clayton. Swinton also surprised many people with her 45-second acceptance speech when she used the words nipple and buttock.

Speaking backstage after her win, Swinton said she was surprised to win. 'I'm so excited, I think it's fantastic. It's completely astonishing, and I'm amazed I'm still standing, but I'm not complaining. It's good."

The 80th annual Academy Awards took place even though there were problems: the weather was bad, and the writers' strike had only just ended. The Golden Globes, Hollywood's other major celebration, was cancelled because of the writers' strike. The strike ended less than two weeks before the Academy Awards and so the show's writers had very little time to prepare. Jon Stewart, who hosted the awards for the second time, opened the show by saying, 'You're here! I can't believe it! You're actually here!"

One of the evening's biggest surprises came when Marion Cotillard won the best actress award for her portrayal of Edith Piaf in La Vie en Rose. Most people had expected either Julie Christie or Ellen Page to win the award, but Cotillard followed her victory at the BAFTAs (the British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards) by winning the Oscar.

British winners included Alexandra Byrne for her costume designs for Elizabeth: The Golden Age, Jan Archibald, along with Didier Lavergne for La Vie en Rose, and Suzie Templeton and Hugh Welchman for the animated short film Peter and the Wolf.

Daniel Day-Lewis was the only winner to use over-the-top sentimental and emotional language. He said during his acceptance speech that There Will be Blood had, 'sprung like a golden sapling out of the mad, beautiful head of [director] Paul Thomas Anderson."

But best actress winner Cotillard probably came up with the most touching sentiment of the night when she said, 'It is true, there are some angels in this city."