(Some words are written in italics and marked like this*. At the end of the article there are some footnotes to explain what they mean.)

An enormous asteroid flies in from outer space to destroy the Earth, an unstoppable force of nature that we cannot escape. Perhaps a disaster like this killed off the dinosaurs, and most experts think the same thing could soon happen to us.

But perhaps there is still hope. Hundreds of scientists, from nuclear weapons engineers to planetary experts, are coming to Washington this week to try to develop a master plan to protect the Earth from such an asteroid. 

The Planetary Defence Conference, organized by the US Aerospace Corporation, will discuss lots of ideas on how to develop technology to find and redirect objects coming towards the Earth. The conference will also discuss when and how to warn people, if the worst comes to the worst. 

Many smaller objects flying around the Earth in space break up when they reach the atmosphere, and this is no more dangerous than a short fireworks display. But there are also large asteroids or comets, also called near-Earth objects* (NEOs). A NEO wider than 1km crashes into the Earth every few hundred thousand years. An NEO larger than 6km, which could cause total extinction, will crash into the Earth every 100 million years. Experts agree that we can expect a big one soon. 

In 2004, scientists discovered a 390-metre wide asteroid named Apophis. This has an outside chance* of hitting the Earth in 2036. If it hit, Apophis would release more than 100,000 timesthe energy released in the Hiroshima nuclear bomb. This blast would directly affect thousands of square kilometres, but the dust released into the atmosphere would affect the whole planet. There could be dark skies* for a year or more, destroying crops worldwide. 

Dr Barbee, a US space expert, thinks that if it crashed into the Earth, it would be a disaster. 'Such events have occurred in the past and 
will occur again in the future". But now, for the first time in known history, we may have the technology to stop it happening. 

Dr Barbee thinks the answer is nuclear. If a nuclear weapon hit the edge of the asteroid, it could cause the NEO to change direction, and not crash into the Earth. The advantage of this idea is that it is possible with current technology - though no one has actually tried it yet. 

Piet Hut, another expert, has a less dangerous idea - a robotic tugboat that scientists could connect to an asteroid and push it out of the 
Earth's path. Modern technology would warn scientists 10 years in advance, so they could send the tugboat into position in good time. 

The tugboat would use a special engine that works with electricity instead of fuel. Professor Hut calculates that such an engine could redirect NEOs up to 800 metres across. 

These engines would also be necessary for another idea, the 'gravity tractor". But Instead of landing on an asteroid, the gravity tractor would hover near it, using the slight gravitational attraction* between it and the NEO to change its path. 

Psychologists will attend the Washington meeting as well as technologists. They will discuss how the public would react psychologically to news of a possible crash. Al Harrison, an important US social psychologist, says governments would worry about how soon to tell people, as they would not want to frighten everyone.

Some psychologists think this kind of news should be kept secret, to prevent public panic. In December 2004, for example, scientists calculated that if Apophis did hit, it would land somewhere on a line between central Europe, the Middle East, the Ganges River valley (the most populated district on Earth), and the Philippines. At the time, the information was kept secret, and many NEO scientists agreed it was the right thing to do. 

But Clark Chapman, a US planetary scientist, says many social science experts are against secrecy. They do not think that that the public would immediately panic about a possible danger. But the news must be given carefully, or people might misunderstand. Then they might become unnecessarily frightened, stop believing official statements and ignore important warnings. 

Footnotes 

Near-Earth objects 

Comets and asteroids that start to circle very near the Earth. Most NEOs are made of ice and dust, or are bits of rock from the asteroid area between Jupiter and Mars. 

Outside chance 

Astronomers discovered Apophis in June 2004. In December 2004, they started to worry. When they calculated its future path, they thought it was very likely to hit the Earth in 2029. When the asteroid passes the Earth again on April 13 2029, the Earth will probably affect it, and change its orbit. But if that change makes Apophis pass through a particular area in space, called 'the keyhole", it will crash into the Earth next time it passes, in 2036. But now they think Apophis is very unlikely to pass through the keyhole, a very small area of space just 600 metres wide. The possibility is only 1 in 5,500. 

Dark skies 

Scientists have calculated the effects of an enormous asteroid crash by imagining what would happen during a big nuclear war. 

Slight gravitational attraction 

Everything in the universe that has mass attracts anything else with mass because of gravity. If a 'gravity tractor" is placed near an asteroid, the asteroid will move very slightly nearer to it. Over a distance of millions of kilometers, even a slight change of direction could move the asteroid out of the Earth's way.