Father Greg Boyle counts the young gang members he has buried. Number 151 was Jonathan Hurtado, 18 ? fresh out of jail. Now the Jesuit is sad for him. 'The day he got out I found him a job. He never missed a day. He was doing really well," Boyle says.

Hurtado made a mistake: he went back to his old neighbourhood. While sitting in a park, a man on a bike came up to him and said: 'Hey, homie, what's up?" He then shot Hurtado four times. 

Boyle's Los Angeles is a world away from the glamorous Hollywood hills, Malibu beaches and Sunset Strip ? the city that David Beckham and Posh Spice will soon make their home.

In Boyle's Los Angeles an estimated 120,000 gang members fight over land, pride and drugs. It is a city of violence as a new race war grows between new Hispanic gangs and older black groups. Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa, who has referred to his city as 'the gang capital of America", has launched a crackdown on the problem. 

Just before Christmas a 14-year-old black girl, named Cheryl Green, died. As she stood on a corner talking with friends, two Hispanic members of the neighbourhood's 204th Street gang walked up and started shooting, killing Green and wounding three others.

Last year there were 269 gang-related killings in LA. Gang-related crime went up 15.7 per cent last year, as most other types of crime went down. Hate crimes against black people have also gone up.
 
Green's death made the public aware of the gang war between 'brown and black'. Next week there will be a summit called the Black and Brown Strategy Meeting . 'All of the signs are there that a racial war is going to explode in this city," says Khalid Shah, director of Stop the Violence, one of the groups organizing the meeting. 

Green's death also caused Villaraigosa's crackdown. The police published a list of the 11 worst gangs, including 204th Street. They promised to go after them with police, FBI agents and court injunctions. But the people of Los Angeles have seen it all before. The city's history is full of anti-gang projects.
 
Publishing the 'hit list' could be a mistake. 'Putting out a list was a bad idea. Groups that don't make the list will want to be on it. They don't think rationally," said Alex Alonso, a gang historian.
 
But there is hope. Alfonso 'Chino' Visuet, 23, started gang life as a teenager. He was attracted by the excitement and riches and had a difficult home life. 'People who join a gang are always running away from something. They run to the gang," Visuet says. 

Visuet now works for Father Boyle's Homeboy Industries. It's a project that helps people leave gang life. It provides jobs, an education, pays to have gang tattoos removed and gives counselling. It wants to remove the circumstances that lead to crime: poverty, abuse and unemployment. All of its workers are former gang members and it has created a bakery, a printers and a restaurant. 

It worked for Visuet. He starts college this autumn and wants to be a probation officer. 'I was on the edge of doing something that would ruin my life, either by doing violence or having it done to me. That's over now," he says. 

Visuet despairs at the conflict. 'A brown gang member now just sees a black gang member. They don't see how that person comes from the same place they do. They might have a mother who is an alcoholic as well or a father who hits them. They have the same story," he says.
 
LA is a city of two worlds ? Hollywood and gangs. On a two-lane highway that goes through LA, there is a sign for a new TV show called Sons of Hollywood. It shows three rich young men and some palm trees. It says it is a 'reality' show, but for most of the poor people of Los Angeles it is only a fantasy.