Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama met face-to-face on January 15 for the first time since the controversial matter of the race issue.

After Obama's victory in Iowa and Clinton's in New Hampshire, the two candidates are each hoping to win in Nevada or in South Carolina.

The bitter and ugly exchanges over race show how important it is for both of the candidates to win in South Carolina, where about half the Democratic voters are African-American.

The Obama team accused Clinton of trying to make him look bad.

The Clinton team had to defend themselves over remarks that some people thought sounded a bit racist. The most controversial was a comment from Clinton about Martin Luther King. The Clinton team said Obama was distorting the remarks.

Meanwhile, Bob Johnson, one of Clinton's most well-known African-American supporters, talked about Obama taking drugs when he was a teenager. Obama wrote about drugs in his autobiography, Dreams From My Father.

Johnson later said he was talking about Obama's work as a community worker in Chicago 'and nothing else". The Obama team demanded an apology.

Bill Shaheen, a New Hampshire Clinton campaign official, resigned last month after he said that Democrats should be careful of voting for Obama because of his past drug use.

On the other side, Michelle Obama, campaigning for her husband in South Carolina, also mentioned race. In a talk to African-Americans, she reminded them that Iowa, which is mostly white, voted for Obama. 'Ain't no black people in Iowa," she said.

This remark might lose Obama some white votes and the comment is also wrong ? there are 75,000 African-Americans in Iowa.

Democrat John Edwards, who is in third place at 11%, supported Obama in the race issue. Many people now think that Edwards wants to become Obama's vice presidential running mate.

In Nevada there is also a race issue, with Obama and Clinton both trying to get the support of Latinos, who make up about a quarter of the state's population.

A poll for the Washington Post-ABC News today showed that Obama is closing the gap nationwide, with Clinton on 42%, down 11% since last month, and Obama on 37%, up 14%. But a national New York Times-CBS News poll showed that Clinton is on 42% and Obama on 27%.

