By the age of 40, Kohei Nishiyama wants to be financially independent, an inventor, and have a robot dog. The 37-year-old Tokyo-based designer who is the founder of Elephant Design has a dream, and he hopes it will change the face of British shopping.

He wants to empty the shops of boring, mass-marketed and mass-produced items and replace them with products that we - the people - have helped to develop. Nishiyama calls it 'Design to Order' and the idea is simple. Anyone with a unique idea, for anything from a robotic web camera to a magnetic bathroom mirror, can post an image and description on his website. Other people can log on to suggest improvements to the design. If enough people then vote for the product, he makes a deal with a manufacturer and the product is made.

'There are so many mass-produced products in shops because that's how large companies work. Our idea is to give people what they want by involving anyone of any age or nationality who has a good idea," says Nishiyama.

The scheme has been running in Japan for a few years. Young designers use it to present their ideas before they make something that may fail. The company has recently set up a test site with retailer Muji to help develop products for its stores. One idea, for transparent sticky memos, suggested by a 21-year-old student will be marketed next month. She will get royalties from every pack that is sold.

London-based designers The Division have placed three designs on Nishiyama's website: a clock that is vague about the time, a set of solar-powered, glowing garden furniture, and a wastepaper bin that tidies ugly cables.

David Tonge, founder of The Division, said: 'We wanted a relaxed clock for the home, so the hour hand is on the outside, and like a sundial it's fairly vague. But in the centre, it displays minutes in a digital form so you can use it if you're doing something like cooking pasta for 13 minutes."

Any item on the site that gets 1,000 votes is put forward for manufacture. As of yesterday, Tonge's clock had received 39 votes, the cable tidier 22 votes and the garden furniture nine. The product with the most votes, is a bathroom mirror that is also a whiteboard. The designers hope the buyers will be busy professional people who can write appointments and notes on it, attach memos like fridge magnets, and then see them as they brush their teeth in the morning.

For now the test site is only free to designers, but Nishiyama says he will take ideas from other people if there are 10 more people who support the idea. 'Because it's a new thing, a lot of people are posting ideas and some of them are rubbish," says Tonge. 'But it can be surprising. There are people out there, who are not designers, with some good, interesting ideas, and some of those may end up in the shops."
