Foreigners who visit Japan can find a variety of sandwiches which they cannot find in fast food restaurants back home, but one group of restaurants called Lucky Pierrot in the port of Hakodate is now selling whaleburgers, burgers made with whale meat.

The restaurant serves 16 different varieties of hamburgers and 10 different kinds of curry and 12 different kinds of ice cream. It's nearly 3.30pm and almost everyone in the shop, near the waterfront in Hakodate, is young. 

I go to the counter and order a whaleburger. After paying for the order and receiving a ticket (number 97), I sit down and wait for my number to come up. When the whaleburger arrives, it is fried and on a bun with lettuce and mayonnaise. It is black and tough. The cost is 380 yen ($3.35). I look around to see if I am the only one eating a whale. Yes, I am the only one. Later I tried whale sushi. It was red, tender, juicy and tasty.
 
Earlier this year Lucky Pierrot sent out a letter to ask customers what new foods they wanted to see on the menu. Most people replied that they wanted "Ghengis Khan" burgers. In Japanese-English, this means barbecued lamb, which is very popular in Japan. The second choice was whale.
 
Whaling has a long history in Japan, and it is easy to find whale meat in any port, such as Hakodate. Now the city is very popular with Japanese tourists, who want to escape the very hot summers in other parts of the country. Coastal cities such as Hakodate have always been the main market for whale meat. But many older Japanese living in the big cities also have good memories of whale meat. Just after the Second World War, there wasn't much food and people were dying of hunger in cities like Tokyo. Whale meat kept many people alive. 

Hakodate fish merchants know that people in some parts of the world do not agree with the killing of whales but they do not understand it when anti-whaling campaigners protest against the killing of whales and the sale of whale meat. When Lucky Pierrot decided to sell whaleburgers, the restaurant's management received hundreds of angry letters and emails. "We're not the only ones selling whalemeat. You can buy whale meat at many places in Japan," said Miku Oh, a spokesman for Lucky Pierrot.

Most Japanese are against a ban on whaling. According to one survey, only 22.6% were in favour of a complete whaling ban, while 39% were against a ban. 

However, not everyone likes the taste of whale meat. Most young people in Japan eat fast food and do not like whale meat. "Most of my friends prefer other forms of seafood, like salmon and crab, to whale," said Jun Matsuda, a college student from Tokyo who was visiting with his friends. "Whale meat is what my parents ate when they were young, and they said it wasn't very good. I've haven't seen a whaleburger, but I don't think I want to try one."

