There are several 24-hour television news channels which broadcast around the world. They include the American channel CNN and the British channels BBC World and Sky News. These channels broadcast the news in English. Now there is a new 24-hour news channel which will broadcast the news in French. France 24 is the world's first French 24-hour television news channel.

France 24 will report international news 'through French eyes'. It will offer a French view of world events from the Middle East to Madagascar, and will also show the French way of life. It will explain the news with typical French TV debates where philosophers discuss the latest events. Test programmes have included topics such as Rwanda, the French rugby team and French wine.

At least 20% of the programmes will be about culture and lifestyle, including everything from world museums to cuisine, fashion and French chocolate. France 24 will broadcast on two channels at the same time, in English and French. But broadcasting in English does not mean the channel will be less French. The managers of France 24 hope the English debates will be even more heated than the French. The channel also plans to broadcast in Arabic and Spanish. 

The idea for a French 24-hour news channel came from President Chirac. He first had the idea when he was prime minister in the late 1980s. In 2003 Mr Chirac criticised the American preparations for war in Iraq. Television and radio stations in the USA and Britain attacked him for this. It was clear there was a need for a news channel with a French voice. Now Mr Chirac hopes that France 24 will be one of the projects that continue France's struggle against the world power of the USA. Earlier this year he announced plans for a Franco-German search engine to compete with Google and Yahoo, called Quaero, Latin for I search. 

The president himself will launch France 24 at a celebration in Paris but the station's chief executive, Alain de Pouzilhac, says the station will not become 'Chirac TV'. 'We have public money but we are an independent channel," he says. Presidential candidate Nicolas Sarkozy will also not be able to use the channel to broadcast his views. 'I know Nicolas very well. I don't believe we will have a problem with that. He hasn't called me," said Mr Pouzilhac. 

France 24 hopes to have a similar number of viewers to al-Jazeera's English service, about 75 million households in more than 90 countries. It describes itself as a 'third way' between al-Jazeera and CNN.

But the birth of France 24 has not been easy. It is a partnership between France Televisions, France's public broadcaster, and TF1, one of Europe's largest private TV channels, two groups which are usually rivals. There have been protests by trade unions and management disagreements ? there have even been disagreements over what name to call the channel. Some French politicians believe the station will not earn enough money to be a success. 

Most of France 24's television pictures will come from its parent TV stations as well as other partners such as the main French news agency and Radio France International. Some people say France 24 will simply be a summary of what other TV channels are broadcasting. 170 journalists will work for France 24 and the station will receive ?86m (GBP58m) of public money for the first year, France 24 is much smaller than its competitors. CNN has a budget of ?1.2bn and 4,000 employees.

But France 24's journalists say it will influence world politics. Mark Owen, who will present the English morning news, said: 'The BBC and CNN didn't report Jacques Chirac's call for a ceasefire in Lebanon this summer. If more TV stations had reported his call, maybe it could have saved hundreds of lives. That story needed a French angle, with France's historic links to Lebanon." 

The France 24 website will open tonight and the station goes live tomorrow. There will be a 10-minute news bulletin each half hour and between the news bulletins, magazine programmes with topics including lifestyle, culture, economics and business. The Week in France will discuss politics and society, and other weekly specials will come from Asia, the Americas, Africa and the Middle East. 

Critical reaction to the new station has been positive. Guillaume Parmentier, director of the French Centre on the United States, said: 'It's not an anti-American operation. It's more than that. France didn't have an international news channel while many other countries have them. It is really surprising that it has taken such a long time for France to have an international news channel."
