The man and the young woman look like each other. They have the same high forehead, their noses are almost the same, even their hair and build are similar. They could be father and daughter. But there is one important difference. They met for the first time this week. The man, Jeffrey Harrison, lives with his four dogs in a motor home in Venice, California. The woman, Ryann M, is a teenager living in a normal family.

Now they know a lot more about each other. They know that they are father and daughter. They know that Ryann was born thanks to sperm given by Mr Harrison in the 1980s. They also know Ryann is one of six half-siblings. Mr Harrison may need to get a bigger home! 'It's quite clear that he's their father," said Wendy Kramer, whose website put Mr Harrison in touch with his offsping. 'I looked at the photo and thought, 'Oh my God'." 

When Mr Harrison met his offspring for the first time he was surprised. 'The first thing he said was, 'Holy moly'," 17-year-old Danielle Pagano, another of Mr Harrison's children, told the New York Times after meeting him this week. 'He's a free spirit, and I don't care what job he has." Three of Mr Harrison's offspring have been very active in finding him, two of them, in their early teens, still do not know about him. 

Mr Harrison decided to contact the website after reading a newspaper article about two teenage girls who had found out that they were born from his sperm and were trying to find him. The article made him 'choke on his coffee". He had visited a sperm bank in the 1980s and received between $50 and $100 for each sperm sample. The sperm bank put the label Donor 150 on his sperm. He also gave them a personal profile and many of the bank's clients requested Mr Harrison's sperm when they read his profile. The profile is a little different from how Mr Harrison is today, however. 

'Degree in philosophy from Europe," reads Donor 150's description. 'Dancer/Musician/Fitness Instructor/Writer. Interests: Health, guitar, swimming, dancing, writing, travel. Loves animals and children. Is a 'happy-go-lucky' person."

Three years ago Ms Kramer started a website called the Donor Sibling Registry. Two of Mr Harrison's offspring contacted each other through the website. Now the Donor Sibling Registry has over 7,000 members, including 430 donors who would like to meet their offspring. 

At the weekend, Mr Harrison emailed a copy of his birth certificate to Ms Kramer, and confirmed that he was Donor 150. 'We talked for hours on Saturday night," Ms Kramer said. 'It was a very big risk for him. He wanted to make contact with his offspring but was a little bit nervous and afraid." The same day, Ms Kramer contacted the families. 'I told them to take their time and to take things slowly. But I don't think they listened to my advice. They were all very excited and the next day everybody was calling each other." 

Ms Kramer is sure that the offspring will get on with their biological father. 'He's a simple man and he lives a very simple life," she said. 'These girls don't care about his job or his money. He's very kind, very sweet and open, and he has a great sense of humour." 

This story is unusual but it is not unique. There is not much control over sperm donations in the United States. Nobody knows whether a donor's sperm is ever used, or how many children are born from one donor's sperm. 

This week the Donor Sibling Registry put two donor fathers in touch with their offspring. In a normal month, the website puts 60-80 people in touch with each other, said Ms Kramer. One of the donors listed on her website has 50 offspring; another says he has 22 children. The sperm bank industry says that around 30,000 children are born each year from donated sperm. A lot of children born in the late 1980s are now looking for their biological fathers.

'Sperm banks should regulate themselves before the government forces regulations on them," said Ms Kramer. 'It's just a question of doing the right thing. Nobody in the USA thinks about the children. They think about the interests of the sperm bank, the parents and the industry, but not the children. Even now sperm banks and doctors tell parents to keep it secret. It can be a big shock for the children when they find out."
