It took 20 years to plan, cost GBP4.3bn to build and its staff had six months' training before it opened.

But that didn't stop the problems at Heathrow Terminal 5 when it first opened yesterday, and the baggage system stopped working.

British Airways had to cancel at least 34 flights in and out of the terminal, and thousands of passengers couldn't travel. 

Things still looked bad today as BA staff hurried to clear an enormous baggage backlog and work out exactly what had gone wrong.

This terrible first day was very embarrassing for both Heathrow owner BAA and British Airways. Travellers were only allowed to take hand luggage, and they were told that their checked-in bags would arrive later, or they could rebook their flights. Delays at luggage carousels increased as queues got longer and longer in the departure hall.

The situation got worse in the afternoon as the baggage handling operation broke down completely, leading to angry scenes at BA desks as hundreds of passengers complained to staff.

Just hours after BA's chief executive, Willie Walsh, had toured the terminal promising a new beginning for Heathrow travel, the airline had to apologize once again for terrible conditions at Britain's biggest and busiest airport.

'British Airways flights from Heathrow Terminal 5 will depart with hand luggage only due to problems associated with processing customers' baggage," said the airline in a statement. 'British Airways apologizes to customers for the problems during Terminal 5's first day of operations following one of the most complex and largest airport moves in history." BA said customers who had not yet checked-in for travel could get their money back or rebook.

A lot of things caused yesterday's disaster:
- Computers did not recognize the IDs of the baggage handlers and they could not log on to work, so three flights took off without bags
- Also, the handlers could not get where they were supposed to go because they could not get into the car parks or get security clearance
- Baggage handlers could not send luggage to the right place because they didn't know the layout of the new terminal, so passengers arriving had to wait hours for their luggage to leave the plane
- There weren't enough baggage storage bins to load luggage onto planes, which made things worse. Carousels loading luggage also broke down
- By the afternoon, the system became overloaded and no more luggage could be checked in
- Delays in loading and unloading planes led to delays in departures and arrivals, forcing BA to cancel 34 flights so that its jets could get ready for a normal timetable today

BA blamed the disaster on 'teething problems', but got little sympathy from many of the 40,000 people who passed through T5 yesterday.

Kate Adamson, 39, travelling from Frankfurt with her daughter Olivia, five, stopped expecting her luggage after waiting more than an hour-and-a-half in the morning.
 
She said: 'I am furious. We had a 50-minute flight from Frankfurt and then we had a 90-minute wait. The luggage system seemed to have stopped completely. Staff have been really rude and there has been no announcement. One BA woman in there was saying there was a technical problem. I've given up. They can send my bags on."

Producer Sir George Martin, famous for his work with The Beatles, was also affected by the difficulties. He said: 'When I came here I was very excited about the new terminal, but not now."

Matt Duffy had to wait on a flight arriving into Terminal 5 from Glasgow for more than an hour ? and then when he was transported to the terminal, his wheelchair couldn't get up the step. 'I couldn't even get into the building without getting up a step," he said. 'It is totally unbelievable as far as I am concerned."
BA is the only airline that can use Terminal 5, which was designed by Lord Rogers and opened by the Queen earlier this month.

The 34 cancelled flights represented almost 10% of the total timetabled to fly in and out of the terminal yesterday but, luckily, BA didn't plan to use the terminal's full capacity of 70,000 passengers until next month, when it hopes all the problems will be solved. In the meantime, hundreds of daily BA flights will continue to go from Heathrow's terminals 1 and 4, which reported no serious problems yesterday.

BA had promised that the new system would reduce the number of bags that were late or lost at the airline by 50%, which, at 26.5 bags for every 1,000 passengers, is the worst of any major European airline.

