Christmas is coming this year on the biggest ship in the world, on its first voyage from China. Mountains of crackers, toys and games as well as decorations, wrapping paper, food and every imaginable gift are on the way to Felixstowe, Suffolk, on the Emma Maersk 3.

If anything happens to this 400m-long, 61 metre-high boat then Christmas might have to be cancelled. It is delivering 3,000 giant containers for Britain. These containers have the largest amount of Christmas goods ever delivered. Crackers, poker tables, bingo sets, electronic toys and pre-school building blocks will be delivered in amazing quantities: 1,886,000 Christmas decorations are loaded in one container, 40,000 rechargeable batteries and 22,280kg of Vietnam tea in another. In another are 12,800 MP3 players.

There are things to cook with, leather sofas to sit on, and pyjamas to go to bed in. Pets will be very happy; 138,000 tins of catfood and mountains of dogfood are on their way. But the ship and its cargo was the subject of an intense argument over the increasing number of imports from China. Caroline Lucas, Green Member of European Parliament (MEP) for southeast England, said it was a 'microcosm of globalisation gone mad". 'All these goods could have been made in Europe," said Ms Lucas 'China now dominates many sectors of global trade. The real cost of the goods that the Emma Maersk is bringing in should include the environment, the markets destroyed in developing countries and the millions of jobs lost." Britain exported more than GBP 2.8bn of goods to China last year but imported nearly GBP 16bn ? 30 times more than in 1980. The UK is Europe's third-biggest trading partner with China but represents less than 2% of China's trade with the world.

The Emma Maersk is carrying about 11,000 containers and is the largest container ship in history. The ship left from Yentian port, which now exports around 30,000 containers every day.

Last year Ms Lucas led an EU study into trade with China and was terrified by its implications. 'Europe made these goods in the past. China is a country that now has a big advantage in more and more sectors. This is a triumph for multinational capital. It's not a triumph for Chinese workers, who suffer from some of the worst labour exploitation in the world and are also losing many jobs." she said.

The Emma Maersk will soon return to China. It will take back the waste of Christmas. One of Britain's biggest exports to China is now waste plastic - which is made into soft toys and decorations.
