Val Salisbury lives in a country village in England. She loves the countryside, but just near her house there is a big strawberry farm. So now the fields are covered with very big pieces of plastic, called polytunnels, where the strawberries grow. And people have to work in the polytunnels, too. These workers come to England from eastern Europe every summer, to pick the strawberries for British supermarkets.

Mrs Salisbury was very angry about all the plastic, and she was also angry that the workers were badly paid. She wanted to show the farm company (S&A Davies, Europe's largest strawberry grower) how she felt. So one day she walked into one of the polytunnels, and started pulling the strawberry plants out of the ground. The east Europeans understood why she was angry, and they clapped and cheered. 

'I felt so much better after my protest," said Mrs Salisbury last weekend. 'We don't need these strawberries and these polytunnels in Herefordshire". 

Every year, at the beginning of summer, at least 5,000 people from eastern Europe arrive in south-west England to pick fruit. This year, two villages, with more than 1,700 people in each, have been built there. Each one has about 400 caravans, football pitches, internet cafes and even saunas. Most local people welcome the fruit-pickers, but some are afraid that the fruit company is making too much money out of them. Last weekend, a reporter interviewed 50 people working in the tunnels, and many were as angry as Mrs Salisbury. The workers who could speak English said that their conditions were terrible. They thought the company was making too much money from their stay. 

'In Lithuania I earn 200 pounds a month," said a policeman from Vilnius. 'I thought I could earn more here. It looks like I am not going to. It cost more than I thought to get here; it costs more to live." 

'None of us like strawberry picking," said a Ukrainian student. 'Today I have earned 23 pounds. But I must pay 35 pounds a week to live in a box with three other people. Perhaps I earn 150 pounds in a week, but when I have paid for food, accommodation, tax, everything, maybe I have 70 pounds for a six days. It's not good". 

'The money is bad," said a waiter from the Czech Republic. 'We waited days to have work Åc It is like a prison. I have been given a yellow card already. One more and I am sent home." 

The contracts S&A Davies gives the east Europeans make life hard for the workers. They have to pay GBP26.25 a week to live four or five in one room. They must pay GBP3 a week for toilets and waste collection, GBP2.25 for electricity, and GBP2.75 for leisure facilities, including a TV set, football pitch and disco. It costs them GBP30 to see a doctor or a translator. 

The contracts say that the pickers can lose their jobs if they eat a single strawberry, stop work, or go to the toilet at the side of the field, or smoke indoors. If they want to have a visitor, they must ask permission two days in advance. 'I have never been anywhere like this," said a Ukrainian housewife. 

The company said they promised to pay pickers GBP5.05 an hour when there was work, and extra money if they picked a lot of strawberries. But they said that they could not promise full-time work for everyone at the start of the strawberry season. 'When 3,500 people arrive, it's hard to give everyone work at the same time. And when it was raining, two weeks ago, we only charged GBP10 for accommodation," said Graham Neal, a manager with S&A Davies.

The strange but sad thing is that the east Europeans cannot even afford to buy the fruit they pick. 'Yes, we like strawberries but we cannot pay for them," said a Ukrainian who was buying cheap white bread and margarine in the local supermarket. 'The next time you eat one, just think of us in the tunnels."