Abdullah Eyaf, a young Saudi film director, has just finished his first documentary film, Cinema 500 kilometres. The film is about a group of Saudi film fans who decide to drive 500km from Riyadh to Bahrain to see a film in a real cinema. "It is the story of a journey into a new world to enjoy a film the way people in other countries enjoy films," says Raja al-Mutayri, 25, a member of the original group. Mutayri and his friends were looking at the internet and they realised that "in Saudi Arabia it was only possible to see 5% of all the films produced around the world" (and only on television because there are no public cinemas in Saudi Arabia).

There are now almost 30 film fans in the group. They are film critics, directors, scriptwriters and actors, and now they want to show this new world to other Saudis. It is not always easy, but Mutayri is sure that people in Saudi Arabia really want to see films. In Bahrain most people who visit cinemas are Saudis and he believes that cinemas will finally open in his home country in a couple of years. "Businesspeople can see cinemas are a good business and they want the law to change. I think it will happen, because only a small number of people are against opening cinemas."
 
Some of the shopping centres in Saudi Arabia already contain cinemas; the owners are just waiting for permission to open them to the public. "In the past everyone listened to the imams," says Mutayri. "Now people understand that films do not destroy society. Opening cinemas would be good for cultural life. Other things would change at the same time." 

In many ways Saudi Arabia is already part of the global village, thanks to the internet, mobile phones and satellite television. Young people want change. There are no plays, films, concerts or discotheques. "There is some variety," says one young man, "but older people organise leisure activities and they keep young people out. They want to stop young people from expressing themselves. But one day this will change."

It is clear that young people in Saudi Arabia want change, but two-thirds of the population are under 24 and almost half are under 14, and the main problem is to find work for all of them. Every year 150,000 to 200,000 young people leave school or university but there is only work for 80,000 of them. Around 30% of the 20-24 age group are out of work. A lot of young people have nothing to do, and there is almost no entertainment apart from television, video games, shopping, eating out and sport. People usually meet in cafes. 

Abdulaziz Ben Salamah, a lecturer, says young people in Saudi Arabia are not bored. "This is not a western country. It is different. We must preserve that difference and respect different cultures. We don't want to copy the West but we want to take the good things. Family life is very important here. Each country develops in its own way. Anyway change will continue. It's impossible to stop it!" What about women's rights? "Of course," Salamah replies. "There are stupid traditions. For example, women are not allowed to drive. But, look, we already have mixed banks, hospitals and supermarkets. The country will change I am sure. I sometimes think it is changing too fast already." 

Even Islamic conservatives think this is partly true. Mansur Askar, a sociologist, says: "I am conservative, but you have to live in the present, with the internet and satellite TV. Change is normal, but we should only take what is acceptable." He does not like cinemas. Women should not drive because "there are already too many traffic jams". For him, Saudi Arabia means "security, stability and family relationships". 

In the evening on Tahlia Street, Jeddah's main avenue, young men drive up and down in their big cars. They arrange meetings in the huge shopping centres so they can look at the young women. They used to put messages into their shopping baskets. Now they send them text messages. 

At weekends the young drive 65km from Riyadh into the desert to Al-Thumamah. They dance and play, eating sunflower seeds and drinking soft drinks. At weekends there are crowds of people, mainly young people and families. In the evening they light fires and sit around talking and enjoying the clear desert air. 

