Last week the British Parliament decided to end almost 700 years of fox-hunting in England and Wales. Early next year it will be illegal to hunt foxes with dogs. Pro-hunt supporters immediately promised to protest against the decision and on the same day 1,000 people demonstrated outside Windsor Castle where the Queen was meeting the French president, Jacques Chirac, and Tony Blair.

Mr. Blair wanted to delay the ban on fox-hunting until after the next general election in the UK. Many people in the countryside want to continue hunting foxes but many people living in towns and cities are against it. There are 318 registered hound packs in England and Wales. About 8,000 people do jobs connected with hunting, and the ban might also cause problems for 15,000 to 16,000 other people, such as hotel owners. Now the government and the police must prepare for the possibility of protests over the next three months. 

There was a long debate in the British Parliament between pro-hunters and anti-hunters. The government tried to find a solution and wanted to delay the ban until 2006 or 2007. But some Labour MPs thought that the government was trying to avoid the promised ban on hunting. After a long discussion, the lower house of the British Parliament, the House of Commons, voted to delay the ban until July 2006. 

But a few hours later the upper house, the House of Lords, voted against the 18-month delay. This meant that the House of Commons had to use an old law, the Parliament Act of 1949, to block the decision of the House of Lords. 

Tony Blair said he was sorry about the result of the vote. He explained that he wanted to find a middle way between people with very strong opinions on both sides of the argument about fox-hunting. "There are people who feel very strongly that fox-hunting is an essential part of their way of life" he said. There are other people who feel equally strongly that fox-hunting is barbaric and cruel."

There is now the possibility of a conflict between police, hunters and landowners before the next UK general election. One government minister said pro-hunt supporters must accept the decision of Parliament. "People who support fox-hunting say they respect the law, so we expect them to stop hunting foxes when the law says they must stop," he said. 

The chief executive of the Countryside Alliance was angry about the ban on fox-hunting. Within 24 hours the group began a legal action against the ban, saying the 1949 Parliament Act was illegal, so the vote in Parliament was not valid. 

Meanwhile there was more confusion last weekend when the Home Secretary said police need more time to gather information about pro-hunt protestors. He also said that killing foxes would not be illegal if foxhunters did not mean to kill them. Police say that opposition to the new law will mean a large amount of work for small police forces in the countryside. 