The funeral of the former Russian president Boris Yeltsin took place yesterday in the Novodevichy cemetery in Moscow. Yeltsin's widow, Naina, kissed him several times as a last farewell. Then the coffin was closed and, as Russia's national anthem played,Yeltsin was buried. Several ex-world leaders, including Bill Clinton and George Bush Snr., were at the funeral. Former UK prime minister John Major and the former Polish president Lech Walesa were also there.

Yeltsin was 76 years old when he died from heart problems. When he was president of Russia there were a lot of historical changes - the end of the cold war, the end of the Soviet Union and a period of chaos and liberty. Yeltsin's funeral was another sign of changing times. It was the first time since 1894 and the death of Tsar Alexander III that the funeral of a Russian head of state had taken place in a Russian Orthodox church.

In the Soviet Union, Russian leaders were buried near the Kremlin Wall. Yeltsin's funeral took place in the cathedral of Christ the Saviour - an enormous church not far from the Kremlin. 

Hundreds of mourners stood in line to say farewell to Yeltsin. The red, white and blue Russian flag lay over his open coffin. Mourners walked past one by one, laying flowers. 'He was a strong man," Dmitry Samarin, his former bodyguard, said outside the church. Was he a good leader? 'History is a very difficult thing," he replied carefully. 'He defeated the communist leadership. He was the only person who could do that." 

Arytom Leonidovich, a 26-year-old architect, said it was a complicated question. 'I think history will say that he did more positive than negative things. The fall of the Soviet Union was mostly because of Yeltsin. 'He also had many human qualities. He was a kind man, very different from the leaders we've got now."
 
Russian state television broadcast hours of programmes about Yeltsin. Flags around Moscow were at half-mast. But many ordinary Russians clearly still think Yeltsin's seven and a half years as president were a disaster for Russia. Only a few people were on the streets watching as the funeral cars drove past. There were few mourners along the funeral route. Russians do not really know what to think about Yeltsin. Some say he was good because he brought freedom; others say he gave state companies to rich private owners and was bad for the country's image when he was drunk in public. 

Yeltsin's biggest mistake was to order Russian forces to attack Chechen rebels in 1994 but the TV programmes did not discuss this. They concentrated on the good things - Yeltsin's friendly relationship with ordinary Russians and his love for his children and grandchildren. There was a minute's silence for Yeltsin in the Russian parliament yesterday but communist MPs did not stand up. 'We will never give honour to this man because he destroyed our country," communist MP Viktor Ilyukhin said. 

Other former enemies were more generous. Former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev ? who lost his job when Yeltsin ended the Soviet Union - kissed his widow and offered his sympathy. John Major and Bill Clinton offered their sympathy. Mr Putin and his wife, Ludmilla, stood silently nearby. Every member of the Russian government was there, including Sergei Ivanov and Dmitry Medvedev, the two men who will probably be in next year's presidential election. Roman Abramovich, a billionaire who made his money thanks to Yeltsin, was also at the funeral. 

During the funeral, bearded priests sang and said prayers for Yeltsin. Metropolitan Yuvenaly, the second most senior cleric in the Orthodox church, told mourners Yeltsin had given people the freedom they wanted. People should remember Russia's first president for this, he said. 'Russia today lives a full life and is returning to its historic traditions. This is the first time in 100 years we are saying goodbye to a Russian head of state in a church."