The information in the files has led many people to ask for an inquiry into why many agents who allegedly recruited the child spies continued to work for the security services after Ceausescu was removed from power and shot in 1989. 'In every Romanian county there were complex networks of these children, aged between 12 and 14," said Cazimir Ionescu, a member of the state council responsible for studying the Securitate archives. A Romanian historian, Marius Oprea, found a collection of these files in the Transylvanian town of Sibiu, the 2007 European Capital of Culture, which was controlled by Ceausescu's son Nicu.

'In Sibiu in 1989 the Securitate recruited 830 informers; 170 were under 18," Mr Oprea said. 'On the basis of Sibiu, you could say that possibly 15% of the whole country's informers were children." Historians believe the Securitate had hundreds of thousands of collaborators by 1989, as Soviet power began to disappear in eastern Europe. 'What kind of information could these children give, except on family, teachers, and so on?" Mr Oprea asked. 'This shows that, by 1989, the Securitate was being used to control its own ordinary people."

The children were expected to tell Securitate agents about their friends' and families' opinions on the Communist party, and whether they listened to western radio stations, had contact with foreigners or made jokes about Ceausescu.

'In the 1980s the situation in Romania made it difficult to recruit anyone by asking them to do it for patriotic reasons, so they had to blackmail people, even children, with things they had done wrong at school or with information they threatened to use against them," Mr Oprea said.

The secret police focused their attention on intelligent and sporty children, whose participation in teams and clubs meant they had contact with many teachers, other children and their parents. 'This was incredible abuse," Dan Voinea, the public prosecutor investigating the case, told Romanian reporters.

Several alleged recruiters were promoted in the secret police after 1989, and some brought their young spies to work with them when they left school. 'This is a tragedy which must not only be publicised but must also have clear consequences for the people responsible for it," said Stejarel Olaru, a historian working with Mr Oprea at the state institute for studying communist crimes.

Mr Oprea found evidence of the child-spy programme soon after 1989, but at that time the ex-communists who seized power after the fall of Ceausescu were not interested in his story so he remained silent for 15 years. It was only after reformers won the 2004 elections and removed the old guard that the Securitate archive was opened. Access to the archive is now increasing under pressure from the EU, which Romania hopes to join in January.