John McVeigh left Scotland at the age of 21 and moved to Detroit to work in  the car factories that were a symbol of US life in the 20th century. He started as a worker but when he retired in 1989 he was a manager. But this week Ford closed 14 factories and 30,000 workers lost their jobs. Mr McVeigh knows his story is now part of history. His grandchildren will never know this way of life. 'You can't do what I did now. It just could not happen again,' he said.

The Big Three US car companies are Ford, General Motors (GM) and Chrysler. Their share of the US car market is falling all the time. All three companies have to reduce their prices to sell their cars. A German company now owns Chrysler and GM reported an $8.6 billion loss last week, its biggest loss since 1992. Ford has been losing its market share for 10 years. Last week 6,000 workers at DaimlerChrysler also lost their jobs. At the same time, foreign car companies are selling more and more cars in the US. 

In 1979, the Big Three sold nearly nine out of every ten new cars or lorries on US roads. By 2004, US producers sold only about 50% of new cars. By October 2005, the Big Three sold only about 40% of the new cars in the US. Japanese firms Toyota and Honda and Korean Hyundai have taken a big share of the market. Now, 30% of the trucks sold in the US are made by foreign companies. 

The American car was the symbol of 20th century America. It began with Henry Ford and the Model T at the beginning of the 20th century and continued with the monster cars of the 1950s and the hot rods of the 1970s. American cars were a symbol of freedom, sexual liberation and patriotism. The car also produced other US icons: motels, advertising billboards and diners. They were all children of the road. 

The story of the American car began at the start of the 20th century in Detroit, when Henry Ford, born on a Michigan farm, mass-produced the Model T. He changed his own life from a poor farmer to a rich man living in a big city. He also changed America. Before America was a farming society. Now it was an industrial giant and the new cultural hero was the big city capitalist. The car was the new horse and American cars were the best in the world because America was the best in the world. 

It all ended in the 1970s with the oil crisis. Suddenly America . and its cars . were in a difficult position. The 1970s was the start of the problems for the American car industry. Now America's love affair with the car has died. 

Americans still need their cars, but now they don't really love them. The German company Daimler now owns Chrysler. Japanese firms, such as 
Toyota and Honda, are opening factories at the same time as Ford closes factories. Cars are not big business any more. Ford is worth about $15 billion; Google is worth $129 billion. Americans are also buying smaller cars and cars which are more fuel-efficient and 'green'.

Hollywood stars don't drive Fender Fords or Buick Electras now. Cameron Diaz and Leonardo DiCaprio drive Toyotas, for example. Young people don't identify with their cars any more. They talk about their iPods or computer games, not their cars. The American car was much more than a methodof transport - it was a symbol of industry, art, freedom, sex, a powerful America. Now it is just a way of getting from A to B.