Tense? Angry? Can't get online? Internet addiction is now a serious health problem says a leading psychiatrist.

In the American Journal of Psychiatry, Dr Jerald Block writes that Internet addiction is caused by excessive gaming, looking at online pornography, emailing and text messaging. He says that the disorder is now so common that it should be included in medical text books. According to Block, Internet addiction has four main components:

Excessive use, and not realizing how long you spend on the Internet; 
Withdrawal symptoms, including feelings of anger, tension and/or depression when there is no access to the Internet;
The need for better computers, more software or more hours of use;
Negative repercussions, including arguments, lying, not doing well at school or work, social isolation and tiredness.

Block says that in South Korea 10 people died from blood clots because they sat for long periods in Internet cafes and another was murdered because of an online game. 
South Korea now sees Internet addiction as one of its most serious public health issues. The government estimates that around 210,000 South Korean children need treatment. 80 per cent of them might need medicines that help the brain and nearly a quarter might need to go to hospital. High school pupils there spend about 23 hours per week gaming, so another 1.2 million need basic counselling about Internet addiction. Many people are also worried about the number of addicts who stop going to school or leave their jobs to spend more time on computers. In China, there might be 10 million teenage Internet addicts. 

Dr Block, a psychiatrist at the Oregon Health and Science University in Portland, writes that it is more difficult to estimate how bad the problem is in America because people go online at home instead of in Internet cafes. 'Unfortunately it is not easy to treat Internet addiction," he said. 'The problem is with the relationship with the computer," he said. 'If you try to remove the computer, they feel they've lost their best friend. That can lead to depression or rage."

Harry Husted, a single 51-year-old from New York, spends 16 hours a day on the Internet. He says that he is not addicted, but admits that he used to be. 'I used to work with computers for eight hours, then get home and go online for another seven hours. I was online until two or three o'clock in the morning or until I got so tired that I had to go to bed. I didn't go out to get the groceries and I didn't care about friends, TV, or anything. When I realized what was happening I did something about it. Now I only use MySpace to advertise my business."

Internet addiction clinics are opening all around the world, and many people have joined web discussion boards such as Internet Addicts Anonymous. The Centre for Internet Addiction Recovery in Bradford, Pennsylvania, says Internet addiction is often a factor in criminal, divorce and employment cases. 

Robert Freedman, the editor of the American Journal of Psychiatry, said Internet addiction is different from person to person. 'In Korea, people are mostly addicted to gaming sites. In America, it is Facebook. They are also addicted to online pornography, games, gambling, chatting with friends. All these things existed before the Internet, but now they're a lot easier."

His advice to addicts is: 'A self-help group is a good place to start, but maybe a real group is better than an online one."

