It is Osama bin Laden's 50th birthday today. He is probably somewhere in the mountains between Pakistan and Afghanistan. You can almost imagine the scene: a birthday cake with 50 candles and bin Laden sitting in his cave with his smiling comrades around him. The truth is that it probably won't be much of a party. Bin Laden is from the Wahhabi branch of Islam which believes that birthday parties are an unwelcome western import. But bin Laden is probably enjoying a quiet smile on his birthday. 

Six years after 9/11, bin Laden is still free. The world's largest manhunt and a possible reward of $25 million have not managed to find him. He is like the ghost of the Hindu Kush, the remote mountain range in the north of Afghanistan. Some reports say he is dead; others say he is alive. The Pakistani army thought it had found him in a village in North Waziristan in 2003. A year later, the Spanish newspaper El Mundo said he was in a Muslim area of western China. One US senator said that bin Laden had died in the huge earthquake in Pakistan last year. 

At about the same time a team of American agents arrived in Chitral, a quiet mountain area in the north of Pakistan, where they believed bin Laden was hiding. Soon afterwards, angry clerics told local people who they were and they had to leave. Some reports also say bin Laden is ill and has kidney problems. Last September, a French newspaper reported he had died of typhoid. 

America's spies believe OBL, as they call him, is hiding in Pakistan's tribal region. 'As far as we know the senior leadership of al-Qaida, number one and two, are there," the Director of National Intelligence said last week. ABC News reported last Tuesday that the CIA is sending new teams to catch him. But if the Americans think he is in the border areas, the tribesmen who live there think the opposite. Over the border in Afghanistan, many people believe that the Americans have already caught Bin Laden. Some people even think he is in the White House. 'Many, many people believe such stories," said Sarah Chayes, a writer who lives in Afghanistan. If America really has such strong soldiers and powerful satellites, people believe they must have captured bin Laden. 

Most Afghans do not support bin Laden. They believe it was because of him that NATO attacked their country in 2001. In a recent opinion poll, nine out of 10 people said they had a negative opinion of bin Laden. But in other Muslim countries in the world, many people respect him. 'Osama is a hero," said Kamran Ali, a 23-year-old from Islamabad. 'Americans have done many bad things against Muslims. Osama fights back." Like many other Pakistanis, Ali does not believe that bin Laden was responsible for the World Trade Centre attacks. 'There's no proof of that," he said. 

'All over the Muslim world people feel the same way," said Abdel Bari Atwan, editor of the al-Quds al-Arabi newspaper. But, he said, if people support bin Laden it does not mean that they vote for terrorism. 'When people in Palestine voted for Hamas it was a vote against corruption. This is the same. People hate American foreign policy and corrupt Arab dictatorships so they sympathize with al-Qaida and Osama bin Laden. It doesn't mean they support al-Qaida's actions or September 11," he said. 

Is bin Laden dead? Mullah Dadullah, a Taliban commander, says he has contacted him. 'We exchange messages to share plans," he said in one of two recent interviews. 'It's very hard for anyone to see Bin Laden now but we know he's still alive." Bin Laden is becoming bolder. With his deputy Ayman al-Zawahiri he made more than 20 audio and videotapes in 2006. 

The messages on the tapes are often long and complicated. Most of the time bin Laden uses silence. 'The silence makes people think they are ready to attack again. It is a very powerful and clever approach," said Michael Scheuer, former head of the CIA's bin Laden unit. Meanwhile, in the mountain forests and remote valleys of the tribal region, the hunt continues.