At Milan, Juventus and Real Madrid the players called Fabio Capello 'Mister', the name given to generations of managers in Italy and Spain by British football coaches around the world. In England, however, he will have another title. The players can call him 'Boss', Capello said.

The England football team will have to do exactly what the Italian says. And that means no computer games, no having breakfast whenever they feel like it, and absolutely no golf before international football matches.

At a press conference Capello explained the need for strict rules. 'After the match they can play all the golf they like," he said with a serious smile. 

'We are only together for a short time," he said, 'and in that time we need to find a way of working. To do that you need rules. Eating together and getting up from the table at the same time and being punctual ? these things are about respect for other people and for each other. We don't have a long time to create a group mentality, so it's important to spend time together."

Capello said: 'Compared to football clubs, we don't have many days together. Therefore we need strict rules. If we follow those rules, we'll create a specific winning mentality, which is what I want."

He said: 'People make mistakes but, if they want to be part of this group, they will follow the rules. If someone doesn't, then we will look at why the rules were broken and do something about it."

At the press conference, journalists who needed a simultaneous translation from the manager's native tongue were given headphones. 'I will speak English with you when I am sure that I know all the terms and all the right words," he said. 'You are good at twisting things, so I want to be very careful. But with the players I can explain and communicate in English and I'm happy about that."

Capello's objective is to create a strong team in time for the first World Cup qualifying game against Andorra in September. In the meantime, he will be watching videos of each England match and talking about them with the players.

'We've worked very hard on tactics for the last few days in order to create a group mentality and a different way of moving on the pitch," he said. 'I've seen some English clubs move on the pitch in the way I want my team to move. So for some players it won't be anything new. Others who aren't used to moving this way will have to learn."

Psychologically, his main task will be to restore the players' self-confidence which was lost when the England team failed to qualify for Euro 2008. But that, as he said, is not an overnight job.

'I want the team to regain their winning mentality by being confident and by playing bravely. I believe we need to leave the past behind. We need to look ahead positively. But we can't perform miracles. We've only just started our work. Give us time to show what we can do."

So, after a month in England, what was his view of England's players? 'I think players are the same everywhere," he concluded. 'My first impressions of these players are very good and I believe we will be able to do very well."

