Last July, Lisa Nowak took 12 days, 18 hours, 37 minutes and 54 seconds, travelling 5.3 million miles, to join one of the world's most select clubs: travellers in space. Last Monday, she only took about 14 hours, and 950 miles, to lose her place in the club.

Yesterday Mrs Nowak was charged with attempted first-degree murder, attempted kidnapping and battery. Nothing like this has ever happened to a NASA astronaut before. Apparently, the married mother of three, separated from her husband, was part of a love triangle with a fellow male astronaut and a female air force captain. She thought he was going out with her. 

Last night, a Florida judge decided to let Mrs Nowak go until her trial. But she had to pay $25,000 (GBP13,000) bail, wear a tracking device and must not contact her victim again.

The group to which 43 year-old Mrs Nowak belongs is extremely 'select': there are only 97 astronauts already trained and ready to fly. Only 20 are women. NASA has only chosen a total of 321 astronauts since the US agency started its space programme in 1959.

This is why Mrs Nowak's actions early on Monday morning were so surprising. For 10 years before her flight in the Discovery space shuttle in July, NASA had very carefully selected and trained her to live with extreme stress. She had an important technical job on Discovery, in charge of a robotic arm for repairing the international space station when the shuttle joined it in space. 

Before the mission, she said she had first become interested in space at the age of five when she watched the moon landing on television, and on visits to the Air and Space Museum in Washington. But this Monday, she set off on her own private mission. 

Mrs Nowak told Orlando police that she drove 950 miles from Houston, Texas, to Orlando, on Sunday. She took with her a carbon-dioxide powered pellet gun, a folding knife with a four-inch blade, pepper spray, a steel hammer and $600 in cash. She also took several large black bin liners, six latex gloves and rubber tubing, as well as a wig and two hooded coats for disguise. 

She also wore a nappy in the car, so that she wouldn't have to stop very often - just like astronauts, who wear nappies during take off and landing. 

She explained that she had discovered that Colleen Shipman, a US air force captain, was flying in to Orlando that night. Mrs Nowak wanted to be there to 'scare her" into talking about her relationship with the man at the centre of the love triangle. 

He is Bill Oefelein, 41, from Alaska, who did astronaut training with Mrs Nowak. Like her, he first went into space last year, also on Discovery, but they have never flown together. Police found signs of Mrs Nowak's feelings for Mr Oefelein in a letter in her car. They also found emails between him and Ms Shipman and directions to Ms Shipman's house. Mrs Nowak told police she had 'more than a working relationship, but less than a romantic relationship" with him. 

Ms Shipman said that Mrs Nowak, whom she had never met before, followed her on a bus from the airport lounge to the car park. She was wearing a hooded coat, dark glasses and a wig. Afraid, Ms Shipman hurried to her car. She could hear someone running behind her, and as she slammed the door, Mrs Nowak hit the window and tried to pull the door open.
 
'Can you help me, please? My boyfriend was supposed to pick me up and he is not here," Mrs Nowak asked. When Ms Shipman said she could not help, the astronaut started to cry. Ms Shipman opened her window a few centimetres, and then Mrs Nowak threw the pepper spray in her face. Ms Shipman drove away, her eyes burning, and called the police. She says the astronaut had been stalking her for about two months.
 
Her NASA colleagues were amazed by what she did, and how she looked in court. Her official photograph, taken before the flight, shows her in full astronaut's suit, smiling broadly. Yesterday, TV screens showed a picture with a difference: as Mrs Nowak was booked into jail, she looked absolutely terrible.

Sergeant Barb Jones of Orlando police said last night that Mrs Nowak clearly intended to hurt or kill someone. NASA has suspended her for 30 days and removed her from all shuttle mission activities.

