Many animals around the world are very rare, gorillas and tigers, for example. There is a danger that in a few years time these animals will disappear from the world forever and we will only see them in photographs. Animals like these are known as endangered species and there are laws which protect endangered species. However, some people are buying and selling rare and endangered animals on the internet.
 
Investigators working with an international animal charity say that people are openly buying and selling thousands of endangered animals on the internet. The investigators looked at nearly 100 websites around the world and found a 'shocking" selection of rare and endangered animals for sale. They included a Siberian tiger ($70,000), a young gorilla ($8,100) for sale in London, and other rare monkeys, birds, seahorses and whole turtle-shells. One of the most expensive was a two-year-old giraffe on sale for $15,500 in the US. 

The internet has brought great changes to shopping for books, DVDs and airline tickets, but it has also brought great opportunities for people to buy and sell animals illegally. According to the United Nations, trade in wild animals is worth billions of dollars a year and is now almost as big as the arms and drug trades. 'In one week we found more than 9,000 wild animals and products made from wild animals for sale, mostly from species protected by law," says the report for the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). 'We identified more than 100 traders" said the authors of the report.
 
The investigators found enough endangered animals for sale to stock whole zoos, and enough parts of dead animals to stock hundreds of Chinese pharmacies. 'They included some of the world's most endangered species," the report says. 'There were live Amazonian parrots, wild cats, a green turtle and even a live pet lion." They found 146 live apes in a week.

Buying and selling apes and monkeys is either illegal or strictly controlled. The gorilla for sale in London probably does not exist, said an IFAW spokeswoman. 'It is possibly a Congo-based operation which will capture an animal when someone orders one." Some of the animals were definitely real, however, including rare turtle shells, clothes made from the Tibetan antelope, stuffed lions, rare birds, and a stuffed polar bear that looked quite new.

Thousands of species are endangered all over the world but the sellers do not have a problem finding animals to sell. IFAW says that the sellers include individuals who hope to make money by selling a single rare pet, and professional traders who have a regular supply. It seems that the sellers are not worried by the fact that it is illegal to buy and sell endangered animals. Perhaps they do not know that the law exists. 

