The German region of Saxon Switzerland is very attractive with many hills, rivers and forests. During the communist period, Saxon Switzerland was in East Germany and was well known as a centre for walking and water sports like kayaking. Now it is famous for a different reason. Sixty years after the end of the Second World War, Germany's neo-Nazi political party is coming back. 

Last September there were federal elections in the Saxony region. The neo-Nazi National Party of Germany (NPD) won 9.2% of the vote, giving it 12 MPs in the new Saxon parliament in Dresden. Now members of the NPD are trying to do things which make people notice them. Last month, for example NPD MPs walked out of the parliament during a one-minute silence in memory of the victims of the Holocaust in the Second World War. Last weekend the party and its supporters marched in memory of the 35,000 Germans killed during the attack on Dresden 60 years ago by British and American planes. According to Holger Apfel, the NPD's 33-year-old leader, the attack on Dresden during February 13-14, 1945, was a war crime. 

Most German politicians are surprised by the success of the NPD but this success has been at a time when more than 5 million Germans are unemployed. Many people do not trust the main political parties. Edmund Stoiber, the conservative leader of Bavaria's CSU party, says that the situation in present-day Germany is like the situation in 1932, when millions of people were unemployed. One year later Adolf Hitler came to power. 

Frieder Haase is the mayor of Koenigstein, a town 30km south of Dresden. He says the situation is different now and it is not like 1932. 

He says he wants to stop 1933 from happening again. Koenigstein, with a population of 3,200, is a small town in the middle of Saxon Switzerland. During last September's elections almost 20% of its population voted for the NPD. Who, then, are the NPD's supporters? "They look like you and me. They are completely normal," says Haase. "They work on building sites. They are women shop assistants. They don't look like skinheads." 

German newspapers have different explanations for the success of the NPD. They say it is because Saxony was communist until 1989 or because 18% of the population is unemployed. They also say that many people do not like the red-green government in Berlin. The NPD, meanwhile, is working hard to increase its support, particularly among young people - with barbecues, discos and canoeing trips. 

The NPD's new MPs don't look like skinheads either. They wear suits; they are in their 30s; and they are very polite. Holger Apfel says that other political parties do not take him seriously. "We have very good local structures" he says. The NPD's views are popular with some German voters . and above allits argument that it is time Germans stopped feeling guilty about being German. 

Frieder Haase and other Koenigstein citizens are fighting against the town's reputation as a neo-Nazi centre. "The Nazi period is not going to happen again," Haase says. "Germany lost the First World War and in 1933 it was a broken country. Then a big, powerful man arrived - Adolf Hitler. Things are different now." 