The number of sharks in the world's oceans is falling rapidly. Scientists say that fishing and hunting sharks for their fins, known as 'finning', are the main reasons for the fall in the shark population. Nine more species of shark will soon be on the list of endangered species. One of these species is the scalloped hammerhead shark. Its numbers have fallen by 99% over the past 30 years in some parts of the world. The World Conservation Union (IUCN) list of endangered species will list the scalloped hammerhead shark as endangered worldwide.

'Sharks are definitely at the top of the list of marine animals that could become extinct during our lifetimes," said Julia Baum of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California and a member of IUCN shark specialist group. 'If things don't change, some of these shark species will become extinct in the next twenty or thirty years."

At a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston, Baum said that as well as the scalloped hammerhead, other shark species will be on the IUCN endangered list later this year. They include the smooth hammerhead, short-fin mako, common thresher, big-eye thresher, silky, tiger, bull and dusky. There are already 126 species of shark on the IUCN's list.

'People think that a worldwide species can't become extinct because if they are in danger in one part of the world, surely they'll be fine in another part," said Baum. 'But fisheries now cover all corners of the earth and the fishing is so intensive that these species are in danger everywhere."

Studies have shown that all shark populations in the north-west Atlantic Ocean have fallen by an average of 50% since the early 1970s. Numbers of sharks can fall very quickly because they take a long time to grow to adult size - 16 years in the case of a scalloped hammerhead. The fins of hammerhead sharks are a very popular food in China and can cost as much as GBP140 a kilogram. Until 20 or 30 years ago only rich people ate shark fin in China, said Baum, but in the last 25 years the middle class in China has grown and so has the market for shark fins. Shark populations in the oceans of the world have fallen by 90% as a result of fishing and by almost 99% along the US east coast.

When the number of sharks falls in a particular region this can have a very bad effect on the local marine ecology. In one example, Baum found that a major fall in the numbers of sharks in the north Atlantic after 2000 allowed populations of the sharks' main food, cownose rays, to increase rapidly. Then the large numbers of cownose rays destroyed the bay scallop populations around North Carolina. 'There was a fishery for bay scallops in North Carolina that operated for over a hundred years but it closed down in 2004 because of cownose rays."

People are free to catch sharks in international waters, but Baum supports a United Nations resolution for immediate limits on catching sharks and a ban on shark finning. Sonja Fordham, of the Shark Alliance said: 'Fishing has a really bad effect on shark populations. Worried citizens can really help by telling their fisheries ministers that they support limits on catches."

Conservation efforts for sharks will focus on hotspots where sharks gather during migrations. Peter Klimley of the University of California found that scalloped hammerhead sharks migrate along fixed 'superhighways' in the oceans, swimming between a series of sites near coastal islands from Mexico to Ecuador. 'Hammerhead sharks are concentrated at underwater mountains and offshore islands," he said. 'So, if we have reserves around these areas, it will help to protect these species and will provide the public with places where they can see sharks in their natural habitat."

One site between Hawaii and Mexico attracts so many sharks that scientists call it 'the white shark cafe', Klimley says. 'We started calling it the cafe because that is where you might go to have a snack or maybe just to 'see and be seen'. We are not sure which," said Salvador Jorgensen, a researcher at Stanford University's Hopkins Marine Station. 'When they leave the cafe they return year after year to the same exact spot along the coast, just as people return to a favourite fishing hole."
