A new era was proclaimed in Washington as the Democratic party recaptured control of both houses of Congress for the first time in 12 years.

'The Democrats are back," said Nancy Pelosi, who made history when she became the first woman speaker of the House of Representatives. 

'This is an historic moment - for the Congress, and for the women of this country. It is a moment for which we have waited more than 200 years," Ms Pelosi told Congress. 

Keith Ellison of Minnesota became the first Muslim to serve in Congress, taking his office on a Qur'an. 

The official message from Ms Pelosi as well as the new Democratic Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, was about cooperation with their Republican opponents. But Ms Pelosi said that George Bush would face new and energetic opposition. The President had a Republican House and Senate in his first six years in the White House.

'The American people were clear about the need for a new direction in Iraq. The American people rejected an open-ended obligation to a war without end," Ms Pelosi said. 

'It is the responsibility of the President to articulate a new plan for Iraq that makes it clear to the Iraqis that they must defend their own streets and their own security, a plan that promotes stability in the region and that allows us to responsibly redeploy American forces," Ms Pelosi said. 

Ms Pelosi plans to use the Democrats' new majority in domestic politics as well. She wants to begin almost immediately with measures to clarify relationships between lobbyists and politicians. The move would ban such inducements as free seats at basketball games and trips on private jets.

In the Senate, where the Democratic majority is very thin, Mr Reid said yesterday that the focus would remain on Iraq. 

The Democrats have also promised to raise the federal minimum wage for the first time in ten years, as well as make federal money available for stem cell research. But the White House announced that Mr Bush is still opposed to stem cell research. Mr Bush warned of further confrontations. 'If the Congress chooses to pass bills that are simply political statements, they will have chosen stalemate," he wrote in the Wall Street Journal this week.

