Zimbabwe has no hard currency to pay for basic services. It has the world's highest inflation rate. The International Monetary Fund says that prices could rise by 4,000% this year. Many Zimbabweans want to leave the country and many have already left. Most of those who leave go to South Africa, pretending to be tourists or traders. But people try to go anywhere where they might find work: Namibia, Botswana, London. Without the money these exiles send back to their families, Zimbabwe's problems would be even worse.

President Robert Mugabe presents a different picture. He says his country is booming and has plenty of food. But even some of his colleagues in the government are telling him that this is not true. Inflation is destroying the middle class of the country and children are dying because they don't have enough to eat. Last week the opposition organized a protest against the government but the police arrested the leader of the opposition Morgan Tsvangirai, and he was badly beaten at the police station. The opposition is now trying to force President Mugabe from power.
 
Many ordinary Zimbabweans believe that Mugabe will never leave power. People were angry when Mugabe stole the presidential election in 2002 but they are beginning to lose hope in the opposition. Daily life in the countryside means trying to find food to eat and money to buy medicines and to keep the children in school. People are afraid that Mr Mugabe's Zanu-PF party will stop them buying food if they vote against his party.

It is not only the poor who have to live on money from abroad. The middle classes in some of Zimbabwe's larger cities, such as Bulawayo, are quickly disappearing as the country's economy shrinks. A couple of years ago there was no food in the supermarkets. Today there is food in the supermarkets but the problem now is that people do not have the money to buy it. 

Felix Mafa, a 60-year-old former college lecturer in Bulawayo, has sold his cars and has to live on money from his sons, one who is a doctor in the US and another who is a shop manager in Namibia. 'I am no longer independent. My children support me," he said. 'I'm a professional. I had cars and two houses. I sold my cars to pay for my other children to go to school. I gave one of my houses to my eldest son. He is married but he has no money to buy a house." 

White farmers once owned the farms that produced Zimbabwe's food. Mugabe's men took over the farms by force and gave them to his friends in Xanu-PF and to black farm-workers. White-owned farms once provided the food that fed Zimbabwe and the tobacco that Zimbabwe exported for hard currency. Mugabe says that the farmers have produced a 'bumper harvest". He also says he is proud that the economy is no longer under foreign control and his finance minister says the economy will grow this year. 

But Mr Mugabe's friend and supporter, the reserve bank governor, Gideon Gono, described the reality of the situation. He told parliament that it is difficult to maintain electricity supplies. He said planes cannot fly and police cars cannot go out on the roads because there is no money to pay for repairs. 300,000 people are waiting for passports because there is no paper or ink to make the passports. 

The reserve bank governor said food and petrol companies, the national airline and the railways are asking him for foreign currency. There is almost no hard currency in Zimbabwe now because tobacco exports have fallen by 80% since the takeover of the white farms. Zimbabwe once earned a lot of money from tourism but now there are almost no tourists. Mr Gono said the power company told him: 'If you don't give us money the nation will be in darkness." 

But there is no money and the bank has to use its hard currency to buy maize to prevent a famine. Because of drought and bad management Zimbabwe has less than half of the maize it needs to feed the country. 'If we were talking about local currency, I would say, 'Don't worry, in the next 30 minutes we will print money,'" said Mr Gono. But he said he cannot print American dollars or British pounds.

Zimbabwe's doctors went on strike for weeks because their salaries were worth just seven cans of baked beans a month. They returned to work only after their pay was increased to about GBP110 a month. Two-thirds of the population lives on 60p or less a day. Many hospitals have lost more than half their doctors. Nurses often come to work no more than twice a week because they don't have money for the bus fares. At Bulawayo's main hospital patients have to bring their own medicines. 'Patients are dying because we have no equipment," said a doctor. 'We can't treat diabetes any more. The nurses are unhappy because they don't have any gloves when they are handling patients with AIDS."
