The richest people in the world are getting richer and richer. Forbes magazine has just published its latest list of dollar billionaires. The list shows that there are now a record number of 946 dollar billionaires around the world. They have made their money from everything from telecoms to steel to Chinese food.

For the 13th time, Bill Gates, the co-founder of Microsoft, was the richest person in the world. His personal fortune increased by $6 billion last year and is now $56bn. His friend, the financial expert Warren Buffett, was the second richest man in the world. He now has $52bn. The third richest man in the world is the Mexican telecoms entrepreneur Carlos Slim Helu, who has $49bn. 

The total wealth of all the people on the list increased by 35% during the year to $3.5 trillion. The increase was mainly as a result of rising property prices, commodities and stock markets. Luisa Kroll, who helped to write the list at Forbes, said it was 'an extraordinary year". In the previous list there were only 793 billionaires.

The richest Briton on the list is the Duke of Westminster, Gerald Cavendish Grosvenor, who is number 55 on the list. He is one of the UK's richest landowners. He is worth around $11bn. Sir Philip Green, the retail entrepreneur is the second richest Briton at number 104 on the list. Sir Philip has $7bn. Next are the property developers David and Simon Rueben, who together are worth $4.5bn and are number 177 on the list. 

There are 29 British citizens on the list. The founder of Virgin, Sir Richard Branson, is number 230 with $3.8bn. Supermarket owner David Sainsbury is 432nd with $2.2bn; newspaper owner, Viscount Rothermere, is number 618 with $1.6bn and James Dyson also has $1.6bn. Harry Potter author JK Rowling is at the bottom of the list with $1bn. Publishers Richard Desmond and Paul Raymond have $1.3bn and $1bn respectively. 

The list shows that some people are becoming very rich in both China and India, the two most dynamic economies in the world. 14 more people from India joined the list this year. India now has 36 billionaires, more than Japan, which has just 24. There are three Indians in the top 20, including Lakshmi Mittal, an Indian citizen who lives in London and who is number five on the list with $32bn. 

There are 13 new Chinese billionaires, including Li Wei, the founder of Synear Food Holding. Her company is one of China's largest producers of frozen food and is an official supplier to the Beijing Olympics in 2008. The US still has 44% of the world's billionaires but its share is falling. Russia is also rising fast and has 53 billionaires. 

The average billionaire is 62 years old and 60% of the people on the list started with nothing. There are about 100 unmarried men on the list. At the top of the list of bachelors are the founders of Google, Larry Page and Sergey Brin. Aged 33 and 34 respectively, they are still unmarried and are both worth $16.6bn. Another interesting bachelor is Russian metals tycoon Mikhail Prokhorov, who is in 38th place on the list with $13.5bn. 

One of the most interesting rich people on the list is the founder of Cirque du Soleil, Guy Laliberte, at number 664. Mr Laliberte plays the accordion and is also a fire-eater. The 47-year-old Canadian founded his circus show in 1984 and has a fortune of $1.5bn. The richest woman, at number 12, is 84-year-old L'Oreal heiress Liliane Bettencourt, with a fortune of $20.7bn.