We are waiting for a flight from Marseilles to Algiers. In the departure lounge no-one says anything. They are worried and lost in their thoughts and perhaps their fears too. But when they are on board the plane they start to relax. 'When we get there, it will be like going back to my teenage years," says Robert, 60. It is his wife Marie-France's first flight. They live near Marseille, and in less than an hour they will be in Algiers.

As we approach Algiers Robert starts talking. 'I was born in the Hussein Dey district," he says. 'I started work at 15. We lived in a rented flat, but we were happy. We used to go to the beach and do some fishing and shooting." When the plane lands, Robert simply says: 'Here I am, back where I started 44 years ago." 

Everyone in the group of about 50 people wants to do the same thing: see their old street, their house, maybe their school and perhaps some childhood friends. A French tour company has organised the three-day trip. It organises visits specially for French people who left Algeria during the war in 1962. In the past two years about 60,000 people have made the trip and more and more want to visit. 

'When I saw the advert I decided I wanted to go," says Lydia, 50. 'My family and friends all said: 'Algiers? Are you crazy? What are you are going to do there? What do you expect to find?' Maybe they think we are going to Baghdad." She really wanted to go and she told them: 'Perhaps I'll be disappointed, but at least I'm going to see what it's like now." So here they are again in Algiers for the first time in almost 50 years. During the dark years of Islamist terror (1990-2000) they thought they would never see Algiers again. For many of them it is a big surprise. The streets are full of people, there are traffic jams and pollution, satellite dishes and washing drying everywhere. 

They cannot believe the how friendly everyone is. Wherever they go they hear the same greeting: 'Welcome home." Older people come up to them and ask, in French: 'Why did you leave? Come back, we need you." Even the young people tell them: 'It's good to see Europeans again." As time passes the anger they have felt for so many years begins to disappear. Why did they leave in such a hurry in the summer of 1962? Were they afraid of the victorious National Liberation Front or the [far-right] OAS extremists? Nothing seems clear any more. 'It was a mistake to leave" says Mary-Josette, a retired nurse. 'We had no choice. We had to go," say the others. 

They have not forgotten their unpleasant arrival in France. Suddenly Algeria was no longer part of France and they were no longer important. They lost everything. In France people didn't care about them and some people were aggressive towards them. 'In Marseille and Toulon they called us 'repatriates' but that was nonsense. We were immigrants. Here in Algeria we are repatriates," says Lydia.

Fabienne, 73, and Pierre, 60, met on the plane and discovered they were born in the same quarter of Algiers. Fabienne is a colourful figure. Pierre is quiet, with blue eyes and fair hair. His family first arrived in Algeria in 1870. He plans to visit his family's old flat, something that Fabienne thinks is very brave. She gathers some earth from outside her former home, a block of flats in a poor condition. This is where she used to buy doughnuts for breakfast and where she did her athletics training. In the 1950s she was the 'Algerian champion over 100 and 200 metres". She sees a bar she used to visit. 'Ah, I was young then," she says, and doesn't know whether to laugh or cry. Algerians smile at her, she says: 'Khuya" [my brother]. 'I feel I know them, we have the same blood" she says.

When he reaches his building Pierre stops for a moment. 'It's a bit too much," he says, his voice full of emoŠtion. He climbs to the second floor and rings the bell. The door opens slightly. His wife Dominique waits on the stairs. She is very worried. Her husband has been dreaming about this moment for 40 years and she wonders what will happen if he cannot go inside. A woman in her 60s appears. 'Come in," she says with a smile. Little has changed inside the flat. Pierre goes from room to room. He finds the room where he was born. And here is the fireplace where the family used to put their Christmas presents. For a while, Pierre says nothing, lost in his thoughts. 

'Everything is the same as it was," says Pierre. The woman, who has lived in the flat with her husband's family since 1963, says: 'This gentleman was born here and now he is reliving his whole life. It must be terrible for him." Finally everyone sits down and they exchange addresses. 'You must come back with your family, stay for a week," says the old woman's husband, when the visitors leave. 'It's so difficult to see all this again," says Pierre, his eyes full of tears.
 
Marcel Pontier had a shock during the afternoon. He was taking a photograph of his old home when the owner came out. Marcel apologised and explained that he once lived there. The other man replied: 'Oh, you must be Mr Pontier." Another member of the group, Andre, a Jew born in the poor district of Bab el-Oued, is delighted. 'What a welcome! After everything that has happened, it is really surprising. These are our people." 

Enrico, 79, is not so enthusiastic. He is a barber who now lives in the US. At the time of the war he was a member of the OAS. 'Algiers is dirty. I'm sorry I didn't just stay at home with my memories. But I must say that I've never met such hospitable people as the people here."