The first guidebook of 'last chance' holidays will be published tomorrow for travellers who want to visit the most endangered tourist destinations across the world. Frommer's 500 Places To See Before They Disappear lists places where it is still possible to see rare animals, special landscapes and cultural sights.

Holly Hughes, one of the authors and a former executive editor of Fodor's Travel Publications, said: 'We all know about devastation brought on by climate change and humans. But this book is a list of last-chance destinations that travellers can visit - if they go soon - for possibly the last time."

According to Hughes and co-author Larry West, a journalist, more than 20 of Britain's best-loved landmarks have a place in their book. The Tower of London and Greenwich Maritime Museum, for example, are at risk from rising sea levels which could cause the River Thames to flood.

Hughes suggests that tourists go to the Everglades in southern Florida. This ecosystem which is filled with rare animals, birds, fish and plants is disappearing very quickly. Already half has been lost to farms and towns. Low water levels and pollution have put the rest of the Everglades at risk. 'The number of birds has fallen by 93 per cent and many of the fish and even the alligators who still live there have high mercury levels in their blood," said Hughes.

The Dead Sea may only be a tourist destination for another thirty years. By then, says Hughes, 'it could be completely dry, because the rivers that run into it are being diverted". Marine life around the Falkland Islands is in great danger from pollution. The Nazca lines in Peru, one of the world's most interesting and mysterious ancient sites, may disappear as too many roads are being built. Many trees are cut down to build the roads and this leads to floods and mudslides. New York's Little Italy, which was made famous by films such as The Godfather and Mean Streets, is also in danger as the districts around it grow.

Tourists should also visit some of Britain's ancient architectural treasures which, she says, are in danger of falling down because there is no money to save them. Strawberry Hill, Sir Horace Walpole's building in west London needs GBP8m. One of the oldest churches in England, St Mary's, in Stow in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, needs GBP3m. Another London landmark, Battersea power station, becomes more run-down every day as government, property developers and the local people argue about its future.

Hughes also suggests a trip to Kentish Town, north London, to visit Little Green Street, one of the last complete Regency streets in London. Further north, the Holderness coast, in East Yorkshire, loses nearly 6ft (1.8 metres) a year due to rising sea levels caused by climate change and man, she said.

West points out that the guidebook's message is not all gloom. 'Some of the destinations can be saved", he said. 'We have to learn from our mistakes because the planet is poorer every time we allow something beautiful to die."