Cuba's national assembly has unanimously named 76-year-old Raul Castro as the new head of state, and formally ended almost 50 years of rule by his older brother Fidel Castro. The Cuban constitution had already named Raul as the man who would follow Fidel as head of state so his appointment was not a surprise. However, the appointment of a hardliner as his deputy was a surprise. Jose Ramon Machado, a 77-year-old who was a comrade of Fidel in the Cuban guerrilla war, became deputy head of state when many people thought a younger man would get the job.

Raul made his first speech as leader wearing a suit and tie instead of his usual army uniform. He promised to consult Fidel on important decisions of state. 'The leader of the Cuban revolution is a special man. Fidel is Fidel, as we all know well, no-one can replace him," he said. The new president said socialism would continue after Fidel and his generation. 'Our task is clear ... to continue to make the revolution stronger at a historic moment. This is particularly important when the generation which led the revolution is disappearing," he said.

The Cuban authorities wanted to show that everything in the country was normal so there was no drama in the 614-seat parliament when the historic appointment was made. The streets of the Cuban capital Havana were quiet as people followed the latest step in 81-year-old Fidel's departure from public life. He began the process of leaving public life 19 months ago when he left power for a short time for emergency medical treatment. Last week Fidel, who is still recovering from his operation, said he did not want to accept another term as president.

The members of the Cuban parliament gave Raul, who was head of the temporary government, a standing ovation before they confirmed him as head of state and government. The assembly also named a 31-member council of state. The Cuban authorities control the island and its 11 million people carefully and the calm atmosphere in the streets showed how strict that control is. Many Cubans want an end to a situation in which they are poorer than people in eastern Europe before the fall of the Berlin wall.

The American government called on Cuba to move towards democracy. 'We call on the Cuban government to begin a process of peaceful, democratic change by freeing all political prisoners, respecting human rights and creating a clear road towards free and fair elections," Condoleeza Rice, the secretary of state, said in a statement.

It is still not clear how much influence Fidel will have. He is still leader of the Communist party and an assembly member and writes newspaper articles under the name Comrade Fidel. When someone mentioned his name in the assembly, there was a standing ovation. Fidel ruled Cuba almost single-handedly since the revolution in 1959 and the members of the assembly always approved his decisions. 

Raul likes to consult his colleagues before he makes decisions so under his rule the council of state will probably have more power. The new president, who dislikes publicity, is in favour of a Chinese-type economic liberalization to improve living standards without weakening political control. He has encouraged people to criticize the system and some people hope that he will deliver better food, transport and housing and will not just make speeches.

With Raul as president the military has taken control of much of the economy ? managing farms, tourist resorts and other businesses and giving senior military officers political power. But the younger Castro has not introduced many reforms, possibly because the hardliners in the government have prevented them, saying that support from oil-rich Venezuela will allow Cuba to return to basic communism.


