In the last few weeks some important changes have happened in Latin America. In Argentina the government has introduced some new laws. In the past, people who took part in the "dirty war" against the left in the 1970s and 1980s remained free. Even if they were guilty of murder and torture, nothing happened to them. Now the new law means that these people might go to prison. The people of Argentina will also be able to examine what happened during those dark years. They will see who was responsible for the terrible crimes and they will learn why the authorities did not punish them. The new president of Argentina, Nestor Kirchner, supports these new laws.

In Chile last month President Lagos announced plans to investigate a similar period in Chilean history that followed the 1973 military coup. Chile will not punish some of the people who took part in murder and torture if they give information to the authorities about what happened to the 3,000 people killed by the military. 

In Peru last month the authorities published a new report about the 1980s, when 60,000 died or "disappeared." In Peru too an investigation will probably follow and people will have to answer for their crimes. 

People have reacted to these changes in different ways. Th e 1970s and 80s were an extremely painful time in these three ccountries. Some conservative journalists say it is better to forget the past and to think about the future. Other people agree with President Bush and say that all'terrorists'are "evil" and that when you are fighting terrorists, they say, all methods are acceptable and you have to fight fire with fire. These people believe that the military should not answer for their crimes because they were fighting extremists . people the military thought of as 'terrorists'. Many say that the people killed were not terrorists and that all they did wa s oppose the military governments.

The military killed a lot more people than the extremists did. In Argentina, for example, leftist guerrillas were responsible for about 600 deaths. The Argentinian military was responsible for 15,000 killings and disappearances. In Chile the guerrillas killed 150 people and the military killed 3,000. In Peru the guerrillas killed a lot more, but the military killed about 20,000 people. In all three countries the government allowed murders and torture to happen. 

In 1974 there was a large advertisement in the streets of Buenos Aires. It said, "Silence is Health". The advertisement was to stop drivers using their car hornsbut many people thought it had a different meaning. Now people are finally breaking the silence. 


