It is an exciting scientific project that could offer hope to 300 million people with malaria worldwide. The plan is to genetically modify the mosquitoes in countries with malaria, so that the insects can no longer carry the malaria parasite ? and so can't pass it to people. Without the right mosquitoes, the disease would soon die out.

Using genetically modified insects is not a new idea but this week, scientists at Johns Hopkins University in Maryland gave it new importance. The scientists there cannot be sure what the results would be but their lab studies suggest that the GM mosquitoes might soon be stronger than normal ones. 

Many human lives might be saved. But what would happen if millions of GM-insects were released into the wild? When the mosquitoes are in their natural habitat, would the gene they carry jump into other species? GM animals have never been released in large numbers, so these questions are hard to answer.
 
But in the past, when non-native species have been moved into new environments, on purpose or by accident, there have been big problems, so scientists need to be very careful. 

'If new species get out of their habitat and are not kept under control by other processes, they start to cause trouble," says Deborah Long at Plantlife Scotland. New species may have no natural predators, or may meet prey that cannot defend themselves against their hunting methods. New species can also affect local plants and animals by bringing in diseases they have not met before. 

'This is a particular problem for islands in the southern hemisphere," says Andre Farrar, an expert on birds. In the past, small islands in the southern hemisphere didn't usually have any land-based predators because mammals simply couldn't get there, and many bird species nested on the ground. So when European explorers took rats, dogs, pigs and cats to the islands, the birds' eggs were easy prey. When the brown tree snake (native to Australia) was accidentally taken to Guam in the western Pacific in the 1950s, for example, it nearly destroyed local bird populations. 

When Portuguese sailors brought animals to Mauritius, they probably caused the extinction of the dodo. 

There are many examples of disasters. When rabbits were taken to Australia, they quickly multiplied and destroyed native species. They are still a big problem. The African honeybee was taken to Brazil in the 1950s and multiplied, replacing the European honeybees that came to South America with the first Europeans. It is much more aggressive than native species, attacking people and animals. In Africa, the water hyacinth plant was introduced from South America in the 19th century. Now boats cannot move down the rivers. 

Even in this country, some foreign plants are a big problem. The worst one is Japanese knotweed, which grows well in gardens. Dr Long says it is bad for home owners, because it can grow through walls and concrete, as well as taking over gardens. 

Another problem plant is rhododendron ponticum, which is taking over the so-called 'Celtic rainforest' woodlands of the west coast of Scotland and Wales. It damages the special plants there, which need exact amounts of light and water. The rhododendrons, which were introduced by Victorian gardeners, take light away from native plants. 

The destructive cane toad of Australia was brought in to control sugar-cane pests in 1935. But it soon began eating ? and destroying ? native species. It now occupies much of the north east of Australia. People have tried very hard to control the cane toads, but they continue to multiply. 

Perhaps the worst example is the snails of French Polynesia. First, the giant African land snail was taken there and they increased too much. Then, in 1975, the wolf snail was taken there to keep their numbers down. But the wolf snail usually ignored the African snails and ate the smaller native partula snails. Since then, 72% of the partula species have gone and only five remain. 

But there have been successes, especially on the islands where new species can cause most damage. 'It is expensive, it takes time, but it can be very effective," says Farrar. For example, the kakapo parrot from New Zealand, which nests on the ground. Scientists have moved it to islands without rats, where it can live safely.
So what are the lessons here for introducing GM-mosquitoes? Perhaps, putting a new mosquito with an extra gene into a place where there are lots of mosquitoes already is not as bad as introducing an entirely new species. And a change made by scientists may not be very different from something that has happened many times in evolution ? by chance. 

Finally, though, what people think is a danger, will probably be more important than the real dangers. GM-crops had no chance in Europe because of 'what-if?' fears: in the end, scientists' opinions had no effect. If public opinion in African countries is strongly against the GM-mosquito, or if people feel that they are being forced to use a technology that Europe doesn't want, GM mosquitoes will not be used.
