In thousands of miles of empty ocean, just two boats are trying to stop Japan's whaling expedition in the Antarctic. One boat belongs to Greenpeace and the other to Sea Shepherd. The problem is that they are rival organizations.

Altogether, seven ships are taking part in the battle in the Southern Ocean on the edge of Antarctica. The Nisshin Maru, a large Japanese whaling factory ship, is sailing south in heavy seas. It has a crew of 80 and the bodies of possibly 50 dead whales on board. 

The Esperanza, a Greenpeace ship, is two miles behind. It has a volunteer crew of 21 nationalities and a Dutch captain. The Esperanza is well-equipped but it looks tiny against the huge whaling ship.

The MV Steve Irwin, the black flagship of the radical California-based Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, is also nearby. Captain Paul Watson's crew is smaller but ? like the Esperanza's crew - is made up of brilliant and committed seamen. 

The MV Steve Irwin is about 2,500 miles south-west of Fremantle in Australia. It is chasing a group of four small whaling ships that the Japanese are using to kill nearly 1,000 whales in the Antarctic whale sanctuary this year. The four ships are sailing towards the Nisshin Maru to offload harpooned whales and pick up stores.

Two of the Sea Shepherd boat's crew, Giles Lane from Brighton and Benjamin Potts from Australia, jumped aboard one of the smaller whalers, the Yusshin Maru No. 2, from the MV Steve Irwin. They wanted to give a letter to the Japanese captain asking him to leave the whale sanctuary. The Japanese held the men captive and sailed away over the horizon. This act sparked an international diplomatic incident.

Now, the drama is reaching its climax. The last time Greenpeace, Sea Shepherd and the Japanese whalers met in the Antarctic was almost a year ago and there were several near disasters. Over a period of more than a week, acid and mud, as well as water cannons and nail guns, were used. There were collisions, shouting matches and three distress flares had to be launched ? first by Sea Shepherd when some of its crew was stuck on an ice floe, then by one of the Japanese ships when it was rammed by the Sea Shepherd ship, and lastly by the Nisshin Maru again when it caught fire and one man died. 

This year, the environmentalists know they could be sailing into a trap set by the Japanese fleet. 'Anything could happen", said Greenpeace's Dave Walsh, on board the Esperanza. 

Sea Shepherd and Greenpeace are chasing the same whaling ships, but there are also other factors involved in this battle: large egos, jealousy, rivalry, distrust and very different opinions about the environment, protest and confrontation. Although the crews respect each other in such dangerous conditions, they are still in conflict. 

The two organizations, Greenpeace and Sea Shepherd, are as different as chalk and cheese. The tactics they use are very different. Sea Shepherd throws acid, stink bombs, urine or even chocolate cake at its enemies. It puts ropes round their propellers and, led by Watson, the crew has crept on to its enemies' boats at night and tried to sink them. Greenpeace's main tactic is to put itself between the whales and the whalers or in front of survey ships ? these tactics are not safe but highly effective. Greenpeace's rule is non-violent direct action.
 
Greenpeace said, 'We're not working together with Sea Shepherd. We are a confrontational organization. We put ourselves at risk, but no one else. We would never endanger sailors on other ships. Our argument is not with the guys on the ships; it is with the [Japanese] ministries".

Watson said, 'We will stop the vicious, cruel killing machine, the Nisshin Maru, and the other boats which are armed with explosive harpoons. We know that if people kill the whales, the sharks, the seals and the sea turtles, they will destroy the very foundation of life in the oceans".

Both Sea Shepherd and Greenpeace know they will meet in the Antarctic again and again. But meanwhile, there have been no whales killed in the Southern Ocean in the past six days. 

