Primates are animals related to humans like monkeys and apes. Today almost half of all primate species could soon become extinct, according to a study carried out by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The study used the work of hundreds of scientists and is the most detailed analysis for more than ten years. It found that the situation for monkeys, apes and other primates is now much worse. In some regions species are becoming extinct because people are killing animals for bushmeat.

The IUCN has a 'red list'. The 2007 list showed that 39% of primate species and sub-species were in the three highest risk categories ? vulnerable, endangered and critically endangered. In the 2008 list, 303 of the 634 species and sub-species ? 48% ? are in these categories.

The biggest problems primates face are the destruction of their habitat through logging, hunting for bushmeat and the illegal wildlife trade. 'We've said for years that primates are in danger, but now we have solid data to show the situation is much more serious than we thought," said Dr Russell Mittermeier, the chairman of the IUCN primate specialist group. 'The main cause has always been the destruction of the tropical rain forests but now it appears that hunting is just as serious a problem in some areas. In many places, primates are becoming extinct because people are eating them."

The picture in south-east Asia is particularly bad. 71% of all Asian primates are now listed as endangered. In Vietnam and Cambodia, 90% are considered at risk. Primate populations have fallen as they have lost their habitat and people have also been hunting primates for the Chinese medicine and pet trade. 'What is happening in south-east Asia is terrifying," said Dr Jean-Christophe Vie, the deputy head of the IUCN species programme. 'To have a group of animals in such a dangerous situation is not like anything we have ever seen among any other group of species."

In Africa, 11 of 13 kinds of red colobus monkey have been listed as critically endangered or endangered. Two may already be extinct. Overall, 69 species and sub-species (11% of the total) are listed as critically endangered, including the mountain gorilla in central Africa. Another 137 species and sub-species (22%) are in the endangered category.

Species are listed in these categories if they have a small population size, if their population is falling rapidly and if they have a limited geographic range. The increase in the numbers of primates at risk from 39% to 48% has not just happened in the course of one year. The major new analysis has provided missing data that was not available before, according to Michael Hoffman of Conservation International. The last major study was in 1996. 'Perhaps the situation was as bad as this five years ago but we just didn't know. Now we have a much better idea of the state of the world's primates ? and the news is not good," he said.

However, there was some good news for primates. In Brazil, one species, the black lion tamarin, that was almost extinct has now been moved from the critically endangered to endangered category. This is the result of a conservation programme which has also helped the golden lion tamarin ? it was moved to endangered in 2003. 'The work with lion tamarins shows that conserving parts of the forest and planting new forests to create corridors that connect them is extremely important for primates. It also helps to maintain healthy ecosystems and water supplies and reduces the greenhouse gases that cause climate change," said Dr Anthony Rylands, of the IUCN primate specialist group.

The scientists were also going to move the mountain gorilla from critically endangered to endangered after population increases in their forest habitat along the borders of Rwanda, Uganda and Democratic Republic of Congo. However, political unrest in the region and an incident in which eight animals were killed in 2007 have delayed the plans to move it to a lower risk category.