This week the population of the USA reached 300 million for the first time. The 300 millionth American was possibly the child of a Latin American immigrant, perhaps in Los Angeles. In 1967 Life magazine identified the 200 millionth American as Robert Ken Woo, a fourth-generation Chinese-American from Atlanta. That was just a guess but America has reached an important point in its population growth and people are thinking about this in the same way they think about important birthdays or other important dates in their lives.
 
The US census office believes that one American is born every seven seconds, one dies every 13 seconds, and an immigrant arrives every 31 seconds. Add those figures together and the population increases by one person every 11 seconds. In the last 100 years the US has seen the largest increase in its population in its history. And this will probably continue through the 21st century, although the rate of increase of the populaŠtion will probably stop rising around the year 2070. The population increased from 200 to 300 million in just 39 years and it will probably reach 400 million in just 37 years time. 

Apart from the increase in population, the make-up of America and its culture and lifestyle are changing dramatically. The first major change is where Americans live. The main population centres are slowly moving from the northeast to the south and west. The fastest-growing states are Nevada, Arizona and Texas. More than half the population of America lives in 10 of the 50 states, most of them along the coasts. 

William Frey, a population expert at the Brookings Institution in Washington, said people are now moving towards a new sunbelt outside Florida, Texas and California. 'As the coastal areas become crowded, people have started to move further inland to places like Arizona, Nevada, Georgia and Tennessee." At the same time the Great Plains, the cultural symbol of cowboy America, is becoming a myth. People are leaving the mid-western states and moving to the big cities. In the past 100 years the number of Americans living in urban and suburban areas has increased from 40% to 80%. The idea of the 'frontier' and living under an open sky still exists in movies, but fewer and fewer people live in such places.
 
Population change is also having an effect on the environment. According to the Centre for Environment and Population, many cities are changing because Americans believe that bigger means better. 'When I travel abroad and come back, I'm always shocked by what I see here. Cars are bigger, people travel further distances, they build bigger houses," the centre's director, Victoria Markham, said. It is often said that the US has 5% of the world's population but uses 25% of the world's energy. Not many people know that each American now occupies about 20% more land for housing, schools, shops, roads and so on than he or she did 20 years ago. Almost 1,214 hectares of farmland are lost every day.

The most controversial change is in the ethnic composition of America and the role of immigration. In 1970 5% of Americans were new immigrants. Today the figure is 12.1% and it is rising. The largest single national group of immigrants is Mexican, and the largest ethnic group Hispanic (people from Spanish-speaking countries). By 2050 the census office believes that the number of non-Hispanic whites will fall from 69% in 2000 to about 50%, the number of Hispanics will double to 24%, the number of Asians will also double to 8%, and the number of African-Americans will increase slightly to 14%. Mr Frey thinks the increase the Hispanic community, with their younger average ages and higher birthrates, will help to stop the fall in the number of white Americans.
 
Roy Beck, president of an immigration research group believes the long-term increase is the result of immiŠgration. 'If we had no immigration, the population would not be 300 million but about 245 million today." The result, he says, is that the country is more crowded and there is less freedom and space. In short, America is becoming like Europe.

