The emoticon is 25 years old. In 1982, a Pittsburgh professor, Scott Fahlman, saw that his students' emails could not express greetings and humour. So, the smiley was born, and with it a large amount of symbols that try to put normal human emotion into the cold alphabet. A?Z might have been fine for Shakespeare, Milton, Keats and Shelley, but for today's global nerd it is not good enough.

Early telegraphy had its own short forms and people soon realized that abbreviated language could sometimes cause unintentional pain and embarrassment. Therefore, symbols were used to soften remarks that might seem sarcastic or abrupt. The result was not just smileys, but frownies and symbols for confusion, love, anger and surprise. 

There are 16 pages of emoticons in Andrew John's Txtr's A?Z ? my favourite is }:-( which means 'my hair is blowing in the wind'. These days many computers automatically change the frownie into . In other words, and have become formal symbols in Internet vocabulary. 

I agree that there is a problem with emails. I have often regretted sending a personal email or text message. The old-fashioned pen gave you time to think, as did the manual typewriter. Writing involved effort. Words and sentences were thought about before being written on paper and sent through the post. 

These days, thoughts quickly change into finished but imperfect sentences. As soon as they are on screen they become real. And 'send' is always clicked too soon. There is no wait for the post to go, no time to correct what you wrote. We can't be certain that an email has arrived, so we have to call and ask: 'Did you get my email ... why didn't you reply?" And then we regret sending it off so quickly. We should have read it through one more time. 

How on earth did we manage in the past? Somehow we wrote about love, hurt, remorse, anger and joy without adding emoticons. We used quill, pen, pencil, ballpoint, even a typewriter, and if anything went wrong we had the telephone as backup. So why is email so lacking in feeling that it needs its own additional symbols? 

The authors of a book on 'netiquette' say that, 'On email people aren't quite themselves ... they are angrier, less sympathetic, less aware, more easily wounded, even more gossipy." Some have even wrecked their marriages, lost their jobs and ended up in jail.

Many of us do not know how to handle email. Do we start Dear Sir or Hi gorgeous, or do we immediately talk about business? Do we cover the screen with capital letters, exclamation marks and emoticons to try to explain what we mean? Do we end with Yours sincerely, Kind regards or Bye!? When you speak such simple words as please, thank you and sorry, they can have a hundred different meanings, but they become toneless when they lie flat on the computer screen. 

The truth is that, unless you're writing routine messages and acknowledgements, email is not as good as the telephone and the letter. Compared to the telephone, email distances us. It not only removes the tone of your voice, it stops people from interrupting or replying. It is a one-way conversation, a monologue. Compared to a letter, email is faster but has none of the humanity or politeness of handwriting. 

Emails are bad at conveying humour or criticism, bad news or sympathy. The form is too cold. Those who wish to communicate these things to another human being should use the telephone.

Better still, make space on your desk, take out a sheet of paper, pick up a pen and do something you may not have done for a long time. Write a proper letter. The recipient will be amazed and delighted that you have taken the time. You will write what you meant to say, and I bet you won't use any emoticons.

