 South Africa's most famous murderer drinks some coffee, sits back in his chair and pauses when he is asked if it is true that he shot more than 100 black people. 'I don't know," says Louis Van Schoor. 'I've never counted them." He is sitting at a restaurant terrace in East London, a seaside town in the Eastern Cape. He enjoys the sunshine as he remembers his days as an apartheid folk hero.

In the 1980s, Van Schoor worked as a security guard. His job was to protect businesses owned by white people. He shot 101 people and killed 39 of them in a period of three years. Some were burglars; others 

were people who were walking past. All were black or coloured ? people of mixed race. Van Schoor was convicted of murder but released from jail after 12 years. But he does not regret his actions. 'I was doing my job - I was paid to protect property. I never apologised for what I did." 

He is not the only one. According to black clerics and politicians, whites in general have never said that they were sorry for what happened during the apartheid regime. Heidi Holland agrees. She is the author of The Colour of Murder, a book published last month which reveals the cruel actions of Van Schoor and his daughter, Sabrina, who hired a man to kill her mother. 'The story is of a family but it is also the story of a divided country and of the people of that country trying to find new ways to live with each other," says Holland. 

Judges and the police welcomed the fact that black people were terrified of Van Schoor. They hid any evidence against him until local journalists and human rights campaigners revealed his actions when apartheid started coming to an end. 

During his 1992 trial, white residents displayed 'I Love Louis" stickers to show sympathy for Van Schoor. He was found guilty of seven murders and two attempted murders. He was released two years ago, thanks to a sentence reduction for all convicts issued by Nelson Mandela when he was president.

Since he was freed in 2004, Van Schoor, 55, has slimmed down, shaved off his beard and started working as a cattle farm foreman outside East London. So far, no one has taken revenge on him. Few black people recognise him, including the bookseller who took his order for The Colour of Murder. When Van Schoor gave his name, she realised who he was. 'She nearly fell off her chair," he says, smiling. 

Van Schoor married four times and he is now engaged once more to a local woman. He says he is 'happy and content". But he does not approve of the new South Africa. 'Everything has changed - people's attitudes, the service in shops, it's not the same." On the contrary, say black leaders, one thing has stayed the same: most whites still won't admit past sins. 

Van Schoor's killings took place during a white government. No one protested as his victims increased. Many of them were poor children such as Liefie Peters, 13, who was shot while he was hiding in the toilet of a Wimpy restaurant after breaking in to steal cash. Jacques Durandt, a 33-year-old white former member of the security forces, defended the killer. 'I won't say he's a murderer. For him it was a job." 

But there is at least one person who supports racial equality in East London: Van Schoor's daughter, Sabrina, 25. While her father was in jail she shocked the white community by dating black men and giving birth to a mixed-race child. In 2002, she hired a black man to kill her mother because she thought her mother was a racist. She was convicted of murder and sent to the same prison as her father. She is seen as a martyr by some black people and is popular among other prisoners at Fort Glamorgan jail. 'That girl, she's not like the whites outside of here. She's OK," says one prisoner.

