Dr Muhammad Atash is the Manager of Ariana, the national airline of Afghanistan. Ariana has a number of "problems", he explains. "Employees steal from the company. They give jobs to members of their family. A lot of our employees have no qualifications and many of them do not want to work. But I think we are starting to make progress."

Ariana has a very bad image. Its history is terrible. During the 25 years of war in Afghanistan, Ariana lost many of its planes. No-one wants to fly Ariana today. Its safety record is very bad and this means Ariana planes cannot fly to most European and American airports. United Nations officials and foreign diplomats never take Ariana flights. Many of Ariana's 1,700 staff are corrupt, Atash says. 

Is Ariana the world's worst airline? Possibly. There are many bad airlines in the developing world. "Ariana is not worse than many other airlines," says David Learmount at Flight International magazine. "If a country has no safety culture, its airline will have no safety culture." But Ariana is better than many other bad airlines in one way . it has a business plan. Atash, an Afghan-American, returned three years ago from the USA where he had a business. He started work as the manager of Ariana in June.

It is not an easy job. His pay is only $100 a month and he has to use his own mobile phone. But he wants to change things. His assistant is Hanns Marienfeld, one of a team of six people from the German national airline Lufthansa, which are helping to improve Ariana. "When we arrived one year ago, Ariana was not up to international standards," he says. "It had no flight schedule. Customers had to pay a bribe to get a ticket, a second bribe to get a boarding pass and sometimes a third to get a seat in business class. We only flew when the pilots wanted to fly." Safety standards were not good. In 2003 and 2004 Ariana's six planes had six major engine failures. "In Germany our pilots only see engine failures in a flight simulator. In Ariana we do it in real life," says Marienfeld. 

Ariana was founded in 1955 as a small regional airline. It flew hippies and adventurers to Kabul from London, Paris and Frankfurt and brought young couples from Pakistan. But in 1978, a civil war began. The visitors stopped coming and Ariana, like the rest of Afghanistan, had terrible problems. 

In 1979, the Soviet Union occupied Afghanistan. The roads were very dangerous then and Ariana was the safest way to travel. But flying was still very dangerous. The Afghan fighters who were fighting against the Soviet army had American anti-aircraft missiles. Sometimes they fired their missiles at planes. Some pilots wanted to leave. On a flight to Kandahar in 1989 the pilot and the co-pilot began to fight. The pilot wanted to fly the plane to Iran. The co-pilot did not want to go. While they were fighting, the plane fell out of the sky and crashed into the desert near the Iranian border. Everyone on the plane died. 

The Soviet army left in 1989 but the airline's problems became even worse. The Taliban took control of Kabul a year later and brought their 7th century ideas to Ariana's 20th-century business. They sent the stewardesses home, stopped the playing of music in planes, and gave the job of director to a 26-year-old religious fanatic. 

The United Nations imposed sanctions on the Taliban and this meant that Ariana could not fly to other countries. Its planes got older and older and its image became worse and worse. The former prime minister died in a 1997 crash; two accidents in 1998 killed about 100 people. 

In 2001, the US and other countries occupied Afghanistan. Many people thought this was a good thing for Ariana but US planes bombed Ariana's planes and destroyed six of its eight planes. The Taliban stole $500,000 in cash from Ariana and ran away.

Now things are changing. The number of flights has increased from 10 to 15 a week. Ariana management says 85% of flights are on time. Ariana made a $1m profit last year. At Kabul airport the mechanics have new tools and the company is training new pilots. It is also opening a modern sales centre, with young, enthusiastic staff and a computerised booking system. 

Now Atash plans to ask half his 1,700 staff to stay at home but he will continue to pay them. "We are building the system with completely new people. We cannot mix them with the corrupt old employees." he says. There is no guarantee of success, however, and there is now a battle to control the company. "We're going to fight," Atash promises. "Because the only other possibility is to sit here and do nothing. And that's not good - either for Ariana or for Afghanistan." 