New research says that the English spelling system is 'absolutely awful'. The research has found that by the age of 11 British children meet 800 words with difficult spelling that slows down their reading.

Among these 800 words are monkey, spinach, banana, handkerchief, soldiers, stomach and telescope. They confuse children because they contain letter combinations that people usually pronounce in a different way.

These words are all problematic for reading because of the relationship between their spelling and their pronunciation. Masha Bell, who did the research, said that there were 200 words on the list that would be easier to spell if 'extra' letters like the i in friend or the u in shoulder were removed. "English is the worst of all the languages that use alphabets," she said. "It is unique because there are not just spelling problems but reading problems. They do not exist anywhere else."

Bell says that the spelling system costs schools money and is the reason for poor literacy results in the UK compared with the rest of Europe. In Finland, where words are usually pronounced as they look, children learn to read fluently within three months, she said. In the UK it takes three years for a child to reach a basic reading level. The tricky spellings make English particularly difficult for children with dyslexia and children from poorer families, whose parents may not read to them very often.

In the research Bell gives examples of words that have the same pronunciation but different letter combinations. Examples include to and two; clean and gene; same and aim; day and grey; kite and light; and stole and coal. Then there are those that look similar but sound different with the combinations of ea, ee and the letter o causing most trouble. The words in this category include eight and height, break and dreamt, move and post. The letters ough can also be pronounced in a number of different ways.

Simplifying the system would improve literacy, according to Bell, but she said people didn't want to change. "People don't want to look at it," she said. But other countries have made changes. Last month the parliament in Portugal, where the spelling system is also complicated, voted to reform and simplify it.

"In 1928 the Turks changed their whole alphabet from Arabic to Latin," said John Wells, professor of phonetics at University College London and president of the Spelling Society. "It happened in the Soviet Union." In Germany they made changes in the 1990s to make the writing system more regular. English has also developed - words like olde and worlde dropped the e.

Wells wants things to change again and says there are two possible ways to do this. The first would be to simplify the way we spell words then allow people to choose whether to use the new or old system, while the second way would be to change the spelling completely. "The Spelling Society thinks we should do it the first way," he said.

Chris Davis, spokesman for the National Primary Headteachers' Association, says the spelling system has a big effect on children's literacy progress: "It definitely slows English children down. Languages with regular phonetics always come top when you compare reading in different countries." But he says that teachers do not want to see things change. "It would be such a big change that people will not even think about it," he said.

"There are already problems because of the different spelling system in America, but people here don't want to use American spelling. They think that it is our language and it should be different." Davis says that people believe spelling is linked to the origin of words.