North Star Academy is a small school with around 200 pupils in Newark, America's second poorest city. At North Star, pupils from poor families study ten hours a day and they know they have to behave well. They accept the school rules and their test results are as good as the test results in private schools.

James Verrilli, principal of the North Star Academy said: 'These kids know drugs. These kids know crime and violence. Their fathers are in jail. We have a culture here in our school which is very different from the behaviour they have when they first walk through the door. It's a culture that tells them they can go to college when they leave this school."

At the North Star Academy children like Charism and Queen-Ama smile politely as they shake your hand and welcome you to their school. About 85% of pupils are African-American and 90% get free school meals because they come from poor families. Last year 80% got 'proficient or advanced' grades in maths, compared with just 28% in the local neighbourhood school. Pupils work in silence and in a professional way. From the beginning, teachers teach the pupils to speak clearly, answer questions in full sentences and always look the teacher in the eye.

Parents of pupils at North Star have to sign a three-way contract with their child and the principal. When a child doesn't give their homework to the teacher by 8am, the school phones their home. When the parent doesn't come to a meeting, their child cannot go back to school until the parent comes to that meeting. There are signs saying 'No excuses' on the walls. 'I was working until 11 last night. I'm tired, but I know I've got to work," says one 11-year-old, as she finishes up her homework over breakfast. 'Even my mother's gone back to school since I've been here." Pupils take a test every six weeks and the teachers check the results of those tests very carefully." As a principal of a small school I know how every child is progressing and how they are behaving," says Mr Verrilli. 

North Star and other small schools like it have developed from the charter school movement in the US. The 3,500 charter schools are independent schools, which get money from the state. They can decide their own school policies, including their admissions procedures. North Star runs a lottery for admissions and has 1,800 children on the waiting list. Parents have to put their child's name into the lottery; three times more girls apply than boys.

Mr Verrilli does not agree that his pupils are not from the poorest families. 'It's quite wrong to say that parents in poor families don't care about their kids' education. 95% of parents just want a better education for their children. 'We're not taking the best kids. I'm quite sure about that. How difficult is it to write your child's name on a piece of paper?" he said.

Every child who attends the Kipp (Knowledge is Power Programme) academy in south Bronx, New York, plays in its orchestra, the best school orchestra in New York. Every child can read music. Shirley Lee, a director of the Kipp academy in the Bronx, says the school works because the students know what the rules are. 'The truth is that kids like structure," she said. 'You have to tell them what they can and can't do and when they can do it. If I teach them to look in my eyes when I'm speaking to them, they will use that if the police stop them and that will help them."

In the UK, people are discussing the differences between the exam results of rich and poor pupils in schools in big cities. A recent report says that these differences are getting bigger and the government is trying to deal with this problem. Three London academies are experimenting with the US small school model and last week a group of British teachers in training visited the US. The trainee teachers wanted to look for methods they could use to deal with the problems of 'complex education in cities'.

Ark, a UK educational charity, is taking key parts of the small school model into London academies. Lucy Heller, managing director of Ark, says: 'This means having small schools, strict rules on behaviour and the belief that inner city children can be as successful as other children." The UK schools minister says small schools can teach children from poorer families that they can succeed and that they can get the education to go to university. 

The group of trainee teachers visiting the US will take some of the ideas they experience in the US back home to the UK. But many of them think it will be difficult to transfer the model to the UK. They say that most of the US 'small schools' are middle schools, for 10?14-year-olds. Not many people have tried the small school model with the secondary school age group (11?18). They also ask where the money to fund smaller schools in the UK will come from. Other members of the group say that the US schools do not have much equipment. 'They don't even have interactive whiteboards," says one of the group's leaders. 'They just teach. Small schools might not be practical in the UK, but what I really want these new teachers to take back to the UK is an idea of the culture in these schools."

