About 1,000 km west of the coast of Ecuador in the middle of the Pacific Ocean is a group of islands called the Galapagos Islands. Because the Galapagos Islands are so far away from the rest of South America, the wildlife there is unique and plants and animals found in other parts of the world do not exist on the islands. There are no rats, for example. But now a rat has been found on the island of Santa Fe and the conservationists who are working to stop foreign wildlife reaching the islands are very worried.

No-one knows how the rat arrived on Santa Fe but many people believe it arrived on the MV Discovery, a giant British cruise liner that visited the islands in April. The ship is returning to the Galapagos today. There are 460 paying passengers on the ship. Many people on the islands are not happy that the ship is visiting the islands and want to stop large numbers of tourists visiting the Galapagos. 

The company that owns the ship, Voyages of Discovery, promises visitors to the islands that they will see a beautiful and rich landscape and that their visit will be an adventure. But the ship's arrival is bad news for the conservationists. Now they say they have also found swarms of foreign insects on the islands since the ship's last visit. They are worried that when the ship returns it could bring more foreign species that might damage nature on the islands even more. 

The Discovery was the first cruise ship to visit the islands. It is scheduled to return again in April and then twice a year after that. The islands belong to Ecuador and the Ecuadorian government has given special licences that could mean that one cruise ship will stop there every month.
 
Leonor Stjepic, director of the Galapagos Conservation Trust, has said that a large increase in visitor numbers will make it very difficult for conservationists to keep out pests and diseases. 'If more people come, the risk of foreign species coming with them will increase. It is almost impossible to search such a large ship properly. These large numbers mean it's much easier for foreign species to get past our controls. And if we can't protect the Galapagos, how can we protect the other natural areas of the world? 

'The Galapagos are not suitable for this kind of mass tourism. The islands simply do not have the infrastructure for that number of people. We're not against tourism, but it's got to be expensive tourism for small numbers of people." Before the visit of the Discovery, almost all visitors to the islands flew direct from Ecuador. 'This cruise ship has travelled all the way down the coast of South America and could have all kinds of things with it," Ms Stjepic said. 

As well as the rat, and the insects, the Discovery's last visit also left a lot of litter on the islands. The rich tourists who dropped the litter 'have no idea where they are or the effect their visit could have". Someone even wrote graffiti at the visitor centre and one passenger asked where the local Starbucks was. 

The Charles Darwin Foundation and the Galapagos National Park Service studied the effect of the Discovery's first visit. As well as the foreign wildlife, they found that sales for local businesses increased by only 5%. There were too many visitors for the local infrastructure, they said, and the large boats that took the cruise passengers around the islands damaged some of the beaches.

But the managing director of Voyages of Discovery, David Yellow, said the conservationists were wrong. He said his company operated under strict rules and had studied the effect on the environment before it received its licence to operate in the Galapagos. 'We know what to do in environmentally sensitive areas. We give our passengers special instructions before they go ashore and they follow those instructions." The Discovery anchored at the island of San Cristobal, he said. The rat was found on Santa Fe, 25 miles from San Cristobal. 

Mr Yellow said there was no proof that Discovery tourists wrote the graffiti or left the litter. 'Local people also make litter. There are local people who smoke a cigarette and throw it into the street." The number of visitors to the islands each year has increased from about 40,000 in the late 1980s to more than 100,000 now.
