In the 1990s not many people bought fur coats. In fact, fur was very unpopular and many people protested against women who wore fur coats. This year, however, sales of fur in the UK have risen by 35%. This is the biggest increase in sales since the early 1980s.

In London no-one has seen so much fur in shop windows for the last 20 years. People selling fur also believe that last month's shocking photograph of the pop singer Sophie Ellis Bextor holding a dead fox will not stop people buying fur. They say that fur has suddenly become popular because there is now a new generation of younger people who want to buy fur. 

Leading fashion houses are also helping to sell fur. Many models at this year's fashion shows have worn fur. Stars such as Jennifer Lopez, Madonna, P Diddy, and the model Kate Moss have worn fur in public. This is very different from the 1990s when people threw red paint at women wearing fur coats. 

Fashion writer Judith Watt, who specialises in the history of fur, believes that women in their twenties and thirties have opened up this new market for fur. 'People that grew up as children of the anti-fur movement are now buying fur", she says. 

In the mid-1990s the anti-fur movement protested against the sale of fur and about 90% of fur shops had to close down. However, the increase in the sale of fur this year does not mean that everyone is in favour of using animal skins to make clothes. The animal welfare charity Peta (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals), which took the photograph of Sophie Ellis Bextor with the dead fox, said that the fur trade was cruel. It also said that as many as 50 animals are killed by electrocution, poisoning or gassing to make just one fur coat. Dawn Carr, the director of Peta, said 'Sophie's picture shows the reality. Cruelty will never be fashionable."

Last month Peta was in the news again when a group of Peta members attacked the fur industry's latest star, the supermodel Gisele Bundchen, at a New York fashion show. They were angry because Bundchen was advertising fur coats for an American company. She got $500,000 and two black mink coats for this work. 