Burning coal and oil to make electricity produces a lot of carbon dioxide, which is one of the main causes of global warming. A lot of people say that nuclear energy is cleaner but others disagree, saying that nuclear power stations are dangerous. Perhaps the answer is solar power?

Most people think of solar power as a few solar panels on the roof of a house producing hot water or a bit of electricity. But a new study in Germany says that Europe, the Middle East and Africa should build enormous solar farms in the Sahara desert in North Africa. The scientists who produced the report say that these solar farms could produce enough electricity to supply the whole of Europe and perhaps the whole world.

Every year the sun's rays produce the same amount of energy per square kilometre as 1.5m barrels of oil. The scientists, Dr Gerhard Knies and Dr Franz Trieb, say that Europe should build a new direct current electricity grid to transport electricity easily from different sources. Britain could provide wind power, Norway could provide hydroelectric power, and central Europe biomass and geo-thermal power. Together with concentrated solar power (CSP) the region could provide all its electricity needs by 2050 with no nuclear power and almost no oil or coal. This would also reduce the amount of carbon dioxide from electricity production by 70%. CSP works by using mirrors to concentrate the sun's rays on a pipe or vessel containing gas or liquid that heats up to about 400?C. This hot gas or liquid then drives steam turbines. The mirrors are very large and in the shade under them people could grow vegetables and water them with desalinated water produced in the CSP process. People could also use cold water produced in the CSP process for air conditioning.

CSP technology stores the hot gas or liquid in large containers. This means that the turbines can also operate when there is no sunlight and at night. The cost of CSP technology is the same as oil at $50 a barrel and experts think the cost will be just $20 in the future. At the moment oil costs $60 a barrel so CSP is cheaper than oil. CSP is more expensive than natural gas for producing electricity but producing electricity with natural gas does not produce desalinated water and cold water for air conditioning.

The scientists recommend building the solar farms in the Sahara desert for two main reasons. First land in the desert is cheap. Secondly, hot deserts like the Sahara have three times as much sunlight as northern Europe. This is why they recommend that the countries of Europe, the Middle East and Africa work together to build the solar farms and share the electricity.

Dr Trieb, of the German Air and Space Agency, says it is possible and to transport solar electricity
over long distances. A direct current grid around Europe and North Africa could produce enough electricity by 2050 to make it possible to stop using nuclear power and to reduce the use of coal and oil.

Unfortunately, governments do not seem very interested in the idea. Neil Crumpton of Friends of the Earth, said: 'Most major politicians, particularly Tony Blair and George Bush, do not seem to understand how useful CSP could be." Last week more than 30 countries agreed to spend $13.5bn on a new nuclear reactor in France. Some scientists say this reactor say will not produce any electricity for 50 years and possibly it will never produce any.

Mr Crumpton continued: 'Nuclear power provides just 3.1% of the world's energy supply and probably cannot provide any more. But CSP could supply 30% or 300% of the world's future energy needs simply, safely and cheaply. We need to spend money on CSP in hot deserts, not trying to find more uranium or oil."