British prime minister Tony Blair has announced he is leaving his job after 10 years as prime minister and 13 as Labour leader. The prime minister told a crowd of supporters he would stop being prime minister on June 27. He said the people would decide if his time as prime minister had been a success or not. Mr Blair praised his wife and children 'who never let me forget my mistakes". But he said: 'Hand on heart, I did what I thought was right. Maybe I made mistakes ? that's for you to decide. But I did what I thought was right for our country. 'This country is a special country. The British are special. The world knows it, we know it. This is the greatest country in the world."

He spoke directly about Iraq, which many people believe was a terrible mistake. 'The criticism since the decision to go to war ... has been very strong and it has never stopped," he said. But he added: 'If we give up now, the terrorists will never give up." Lindsey German, of the Stop the War coalition, said: 'We cannot let this day pass without reminding people what Tony Blair did in going to war in Iraq, but this is about the future as well.

Mr Blair's Labour Party defeated the Conservative Party in a general election in May 1997. When Labour won after 18 years of Conservative rule, perhaps 'people expected too much." But he added: 'I would not want it any other way. I was, and I still am, an optimist." He then mentioned Africa, climate change and globalization and said that Britain had changed during his 10 years as prime minister: 'Britain is not a follower, 
Britain is a leader," he said. Mr Blair said that as prime minister, you had to make decisions over problems like Sierra Leone, Kosovo and then Afghanistan and Iraq. He did not say if he would stay in parliament as an MP or not.

Earlier in the day, the PM told senior members of his government that he was going to tell the people that he was going to leave his job, joking it was 'not quite a normal day". Then he flew to the north-east of England. Meanwhile in the House of Commons, Gordon Brown, the man who will be the next prime minister, was answering questions about the economy. 'There are 600,000 job vacancies in the economy ? and there's one more today," he joked.

Mr Blair is 54 years old and his plans for the future are not yet clear. People have already begun to praise him for what he did while he was prime minister. Former US secretary of state Colin Powell said Mr Blair had 'an enormous influence on world politics, and he certainly has had an enormous influence on the special relationship between the United States and Great Britain. He has been a friend and he has been strong in the face of negative public opinion and during crises."

Mr Blair was unique among Labour leaders in winning three general elections, one after the other. Although he announced before the 2005 election that he would serve a 'full third term", pressure from Labour MPs last autumn forced him to say he would leave the job within a year. Now he has finally made that decision.