Above the Arctic Circle a bright pink light often appears in the night sky. This is called the northern lights (or aurora borealis). Sometimes it seems that the sun is rising in the wrong place. Colours of pink, red, green and violet fill the sky. Where does this strange light come from? Magnetic storms in space send out energy particles. These particles hit the Earth's atmosphere and produce the coloured light. For scientists the lights are one of the oldest mysteries in space physics: how and where in space do these light shows begin? And how can scientists predict when and where they will happen?

Now the North American Space Agency (NASA) is sending five spacecraft into space to try to answer these questions. This project, known as the Themis project, will measure how the magnetic field around the Earth changes in real time. This will allow scientists to make better forecasts about the weather in space. This information is important for the safety of communications satellites as they orbit the Earth and will also be very important for human space travellers.

The northern lights are the result of changes in the Earth's magnetic field. The sun continually sends energy towards our planet. The Earth's magnetic field stores some of this energy at a height of 10,000 km above the surface of the Earth. The magnetic field protects us from much of the deadly radiation that comes from the sun. However, sometimes energy escapes from the field and showers of electrons rise into the upper atmosphere. When these electrons come into contact with air, they create the energy that produces the light of the northern lights.

The different colours are the result of the different gases in the atmosphere at 10,000km above the Earth. Green and red are oxygen and violet is nitrogen. Most of the time, the northern lights are a wide band of light from east to west but every few hours the energy causes a storm.

'It is interesting when a storm starts ? the light gets brighter and then, within 30 seconds, it starts moving quickly towards the north. It covers the whole sky and then breaks up into little pieces," said Vassilis Angelopoulos, a scientist working on the Themis project. 'It's wonderful to watch." No-one knows exactly why and where the storms begin. 'The problem so far is that using just one satellite we cannot be sure where the storms begin," said Professor Angelopoulos.

The five satellites will orbit the Earth in a line and record the energy passing from the sun to the Earth. They will be in different places in the Earth's magnetic field and will record when and where an energy storm begins between two of the satellites. More than 20 ground stations across the US will track the Themis satellites, and will record exactly where the magnetic storms happen.

'In the same way that meteorologists study tornadoes in order to understand the large thunderstorms, we study magnetic storms to understand large space storms," said Professor Angelopoulos. If scientists can forecast when these large storms will happen, spacecraft and astronauts will be able to operate safely, because the storms can damage electronic systems on spacecraft.

At the moment the forecasting of space storms is not reliable. 'It's like what weather forecasting was a hundred years ago. In the last 50 years, weather forecasting has improved a lot because they understand exactly what happens. We are doing the same kind of thing. We are trying to give people better forecasts of space storms," says UK space expert Mike Hapgood.

The Themis satellites will take their first measurements next year. They will operate for two years. Dr Hapgood says that understanding the Earth's magnetic field will also give scientists information about other planets in the solar system that have magnetic fields: 'These things also happen in other parts of the universe. Understanding how magnetic fields work is a universal question."
