For the people watching the news in Turkmenistan, it was another normal bulletin. But as the newsreader began reading the news at 9pm, viewers across the central Asian country saw something unusual crawling across the studio table: a large brown cockroach.

The cockroach ran the whole way across the desk and then disappeared. The programme, complete with cockroach, was repeated at 11pm that night.

Horrified officials from Turkmenistan's ministry of culture knew nothing about the cockroach until 9am the next day. The results of the cockroach's five minutes of fame were immediate and severe.

The country's president, Kurbanguly Berdymukhamedov immediately sacked 30 workers from the main state TV channel, the news website Kronika Turkmenistan reported yesterday.

Before the cockroach incident, Berdymukhamedov had ordered Turkmenistan's minister of culture, Gulmurat Muradov, to modernise the country's TV channel. However, the new ministerial committee in charge of the modernization only works from 9am to 6pm. This allowed the cockroach to run around at 9pm unnoticed.

Berdymukhamedov became leader of the oil-rich former Soviet republic in December 2006. The previous president, Saparmurat Niyazov, sacked several TV executives after drunken technicians forgot to broadcast his New Year's speech to the nation. They eventually broadcast the speech at 3am.

Those sacked in the cockroach incident included journalists, directors, camera operators, and technical staff.

Berdymukhamedov has begun a series of mild liberal reforms in Turkmenistan. He has said that Internet cafes will open in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan's capital, and he has said that school children should start learning foreign languages again.

Last March the president restored pensions to more than 100,000 old people. In January he announced that opera and ballet are allowed to be performed once again in Turkmenistan .

Berdymukhamedov wants to end Turkmenistan's isolation from the rest of the world in other ways too. He wants to attract more foreign tourists to Turkmenistan, especially to the new multibillion pound tourist resort on the Caspian Sea. The president has also visited Washington.

Berdymukhamedov's dislike of cockroaches may have something to do with his previous career as a dentist. He graduated from Turkmenistan's state medical institute in 1979, he has a PhD in medical sciences from Moscow, and he worked as a dentist from 1980 to 1995. In December 1997, he was made minister for health.