A survey has shown that in modern-day Britain many children spend a lot of their daily lives watching television. They watch TV before they go to school, when they return home, as they eat their evening meal and then (63% of them ? a much higher percentage than read a book each day) in bed at night. The survey of five to 16-year-olds shows that four out of every five children now have a TV set in their bedroom.

Many children now do other things while they watch television, including social networking on the Internet, looking from their laptop to the TV screen and back again. Even if they are concentrating on the television, young people often do not watch just one programme. Boys in particular often switch from one channel to another and back again to watch two programmes at the same time. The survey, from the market research agency Childwise, will make many people worried that childhood is now more about private space and sedentary activities than about play, social interaction or the child's own imagination.

The survey also shows that children are watching more television than before. The amount of television-watching decreased over the last three years but is now increasing again. This is mainly the result of more girls watching soaps.

Children's use of the Internet is also increasing rapidly. This means British children spend an average of five hours and 20 minutes in front of a screen every day, compared with four hours and 40 minutes five years ago. But children do not read for pleasure as much as they did in the past. Four out of five children read books in their own time but only one out of four read books every day and only 53% at least once a week.

The survey interviewed 1,147 children in 60 schools around England, Scotland and Wales. It found that children aged 5 to 16 watch television for an average 2.6 hours a day, and one in 10 say they watch more than four hours a day. The survey also asked if children watched television while eating dinner or in bed before going to sleep. It found that 58% watch during their evening meal, while 63% lie in bed watching TV (rising to almost 75% of 13 to 16-year-olds). 66% particularly the youngest children ? watch before school, and 83% turn on the television after returning home.

Rosemary Duff, the research director of Childwise, said television was now 'a part of children's lives". She said that children watch it in a different way now. 'In the past they paid a lot of attention when they watched television but now it is everywhere, at home and everywhere you go."

'Children now multitask. They have one eye on the television while they read magazines or use the computer," Duff said. When Childwise asked boys to choose between programmes on different channels they often didn't want to choose and said they wanted to 'watch both'. 'They switch from one programme to another and cannot imagine that they need to make a decision. They are surprised when you ask them to make a choice."

Computers are also now a key part of children's private worlds. 'The Internet is now an important part of most young people's lives," says the study. 85% of five to 16-year-olds use the Internet, and over a third (including a quarter of five to six-year-olds) own a computer or laptop. On average, they go online just over four times a week and spend two hours online each time.

The survey shows that children are using the Internet more and more, especially younger children. This is mainly because of social networking sites like Bebo. The main reason children use the Internet is communication (social networking), then fun (online games) and finally studying. Almost three quarters (72%) of children have visited a social networking site, and over half have their own profile. Sometimes they lie about their age if there are minimum age requirements to join a social networking site. Children as young as eight are now joining sites like these.

Kathy Evans, policy director of the Children's Society, which is studying modern childhood, said that people are worried about the possible results of children's TV and Internet viewing habits. The Children's Society will publish a report next month on children and technology.

