Celebrity Big Brother is a reality TV programme shown on British television. It is now in its fifth year. In the programme a group of 'famous' people live together in a specially constructed house for several weeks. They have no contact at all with the outside world (no telephones, television, newspapers etc.) and cameras film everything they do and say. In the last two years the number of people watching the programme has fallen. But the number of people watching this year's programme has suddenly risen. Why? Some people believe several of the contestants behaved in a racist way towards another contestant. This has led to street demonstrations in India, shock and anger in the government and a police investigation.

People have always disagreed about the programme, which is shown on Channel 4, but this is the first time it has caused an international argument. 22,000 viewers have made official complaints about the programme; the Indian government has criticised it and UK police said they would investigate reports that three white contestants had behaved in a racist way towards Indian film actress Shilpa Shetty. 

Last night Channel 4 broadcast an angry argument between Shetty and Jade Goody, who earned millions of pounds after appearing on the non-celebrity version of the programme several years ago. Speaking to another contestant, Cleo Rocos, after the argument, Shetty said: 'I'm representing my country. Is that what today's UK is? It's frightening. It's quite a shame actually." Rocos said: 'I don't think there's anything racist in it." But Shetty replied: 'It is racist, I'm telling you." Later, another contestant Danielle Lloyd, who is a fashion model, said that Shetty should go back home. 

India's Information and Broadcasting Minister said, 'If there has been some racism in the programme, it is not only an attack on women but also on the colour of her skin and her country." Apart from the 22,000 complaints made by viewers, another 20,000 people signed a petition organised by the newspaper Eastern Eye. 

The local police said they were going to investigate 30 complaints. A spokesman said: 'We are investigating reports of racist behaviour in the Big Brother house, and we will look at videotapes of the programme." The managers of Channel 4 and the show's producers met yesterday to discuss the situation, but privately they may be very pleased. 4.5 million people watched Tuesday's programme, one million more than on Monday. 

The problems began after several arguments involving Goody, her boyfriend Jack Tweed, Lloyd and a former pop singer Jo O'Meara. At one point Goody, after an argument with Shetty, said: 'You need to learn to speak properly. You need a day in the slums. You're a fake." 

Channel 4 said that it wasn't racism but the result of class and cultural differences. But in India, the row has united all the major political parties. Communists, Hindu nationalists and the ruling Congress party have all demanded action. '[Big Brother] is holding a mirror to British society. This is not a one-off situation. We should thank Channel 4 for showing us the real face of Britain," Mahesh Bhatt, a film director, told the Guardian. 

Fans of Shilpa Shetty protested on the streets in Patna, eastern India. In Bangalore, British politician Gordon Brown had to answer questions from journalists about a reality TV programme he said he had never seen. 'I understand that in the UK thousands of viewers have complained about the programme," he said. 'I want people to see Britain as a fair and tolerant country." A spokesman for Tony Blair later said that the UK does not tolerate racism in any way. 

Goody said about Shetty: 'She makes me feel sick", while another contestant continually called her 'the Indian". Later Lloyd said that Shetty 'wants to be white" and called her a 'dog". After Shetty cooked a chicken dinner, Lloyd said: 'They eat with their hands in India, don't they. Or is that China?" She also said: 'You don't know where those hands have been."
