Alternative medicines are more and more popular in Britain. Sales of herbal and homeopathic remedies in chemists, health stores and supermarkets have doubled in the last ten years and are now worth GBP200m a year.

And there is no sign that this trend is going to change. The majority of the people who buy alternative medicines are women aged 35 years and over. Sales will probably reach GBP265m in the next four years. The British Lifestyles report by Mintel says that natural cures now have 'a better reputation for offering legitimate alternatives to pharmaceutical-based treatments".

One reason for the increase in sales is that the British government wants people to get advice from pharmacists. Because of this more people are trying alternative treatments instead of going to doctors. New EU laws require all over-the-counter herbal medicines in the UK to have either Traditional Herbal Medicines Registration or full Marketing Authorization. These standards make people feel it is safer to buy alternative medicines.

Herbal medicines, which are made from plants and minerals, account for the fastest increase in sales. Scientific tests have shown there is evidence that some have positive effects. Homeopathic remedies are more controversial as critics say that they offer nothing more than a placebo effect. Homeopathy is a system of therapy based on the idea that illness can be treated with drugs in minute doses. 

Modern lifestyles, longer working hours and stress have all made people turn to alternative medicine. Although one in five people suffer from stress and insomnia, many do not want to tell their doctors, as they don't want to have black marks on their medical records. Others don't want people to know that they take antidepressants, while others worry that they might develop an addiction to pharmaceutical drugs. For many, alternative medicines are the natural answer.
 
Edzard Ernst, professor of alternative medicine at Exeter University, said he was not surprised at the increase in sales. 'The last time I checked there were 40 million websites promoting alternative medicine, and many herbal medicines do work." 

'But homeopathy doesn't work," he said. 'And people should know what they are taking, otherwise they could cause more harm than good. Some remedies don't work well with prescribed medicines."

While researching his latest book about alternative medicine, Ernst said his co-author, Dr Simon Singh, visited ten homeopathic outlets and asked for protection from malaria. 'All the outlets offered some, and the people were all very nice, but the nightmare begins when you return home from your holiday with malaria."

