Last week a truck driver called Charles Roberts went into a school in Nickel Mines in the American state of Pennsylvania and shot five schoolgirls dead. It was a shocking crime and newspapers and television stations from around the world reported the case. According to police, Roberts was angry because someone insulted him there when he was 12 years old. He killed five people because of that insult.

There was something else that was unusual about this case. Nickel Mines in is Lancaster county, Pennsylvania. Lancaster county is home to the Amish people, a deeply religious group who mostly work as farmers. The five girls who died were Amish. If you watched the television pictures from the scene, you could see some unusual things. For example, the parents of the children went to the hospital in police vans because they did not want to travel in the police helicopter. Outside the hospital worried mothers waited for news while television pictures went around the world. The Amish do not have televisions in their homes so the parents had to come to the hospital in person to find out what had happened. Several hours after the tragedy some people still did not know about it. They found out when their friends and neighbours told them. 

The Amish are pacifist. At times of war they will not fight in the army but do civilian jobs instead. Lancaster county, 80km west of Philadelphia, has no police force and no guns. In the United States that is extremely unusual. If you can remember Witness, the 1985 Harrison Ford film, youwill have an idea what Lancaster county looks like. Green hills with black and white cattle, old farm buildings, plain, simple houses, and black buggies pulled by horses. People also wear very simple clothes. Lancaster county is a community of farmers that has changed only a little since the late 19th century. 

In reality, the Amish are the product of some dramatic changes. They began as Mennonites, a religion that was born in Switzerland in 1525, when the Mennonites left the Protestant church. Later, in Switzerland in 1693, the Amish split from the Mennonites. Then the Amish emigrated to Pennsylvania around the 1730s.The main group of Amish in Lancaster county is The Old Order of Amishes. This group split from the other Amish because of an argument over modern technology. The Old Order only wanted to use technology they could understand through reading the Bible. 

"It is easy to get it wrong about the Amish," says Peter Seibert, president of the Heritage Centre of Lancaster county and a non-Amish. "They are not trying to block out the modern world. They want to keep their community as a simple farming society. They pick and choose what they want from our world".

So they do not have television because they do not want their children to see sexual and violent images. They travel by buggy because they believe they help to keep people together and that motor cars do not keep people together. And there are some modern things in Lancaster county. They do not have telephones in their houses, but if they have a business they have a telephone there. They don't have electrical gadgets but they have cash registers and even laptop computers. 

"Tourists often have no respect. They walk straight into Amish houses or schools because they think they are a tourist attraction. They do not understand that this is a living community that wants to remain private", says researcher Stephen Scott. The funny thing is that the Amish profit from tourism. They do not like being like zoo animals but they also make a lot of money out of the tourists.

A couple of years ago a reality TV company made a programme called Amish in the City. The programme clearly showed the two sides of Amish life. A group of Amish teenagers were taken out of their Amish communities and transported to downtown Los Angeles. The Amish religion was able to understand this. The teenagers were in a period known as the "running around years", the period between the end of school, at the age of 14, and the entry into the church in your late teens or early 20s.

In those five to eight years of freedom the children are not officially members of the church so the church cannot expel them. The result is a successful community. 80% of the teenagers who move away from the community come back in the end. The main problem for the Amish is that their population is growing quickly and there is not enough land for them to farm. 

None of this will be any comfort to the parents and neighbours of the five girls who died in last week's shooting or the others who remain critically ill. Any comfort will come from their faith itself. Seibert puts it well: "For them this is God's will, and that is all. Our world is all about the individual. Their world is all about the community before God and the better life they will lead after death. That is difficult for us to understand, but that is how it is."