Naomi Campbell's day began as normal yesterday. The supermodel was chauffeur-driven in a black four-wheel drive car with dark windows, surrounded by her bodyguards. When she arrived, she walked elegantly past a long line of press photographers shouting, 'Naomi, over here!" before entering the building and changing into her costume.

And then it all went wrong. Where were the assistants to help her put on her clothes? Where were the makeup artists, the lighting experts and the dressmakers? And finally, where was the Vogue editor Anna Wintour?

The only people watching were a few garbage collectors ? real garbage collectors, not actors dressed like that to make fashion pictures look more interesting. Ms Campbell, 36, had just begun a week-long stay on the poor side of New York.

She was the guest of the city's sanitation department and will spend each day this week, from 8am to 4pm, at its warehouse in downtown Manhattan on the edge of the East River. Last year, she threw her mobile phone at her housemaid, Ana Scolavino, who needed four stitches to the head. The community service was her punishment. She also has to pay a fine of $185 and attend a two-day anger management course.

Ms Campbell had a lot of bad publicity about the incident a year ago, but she walked into the warehouse at Pier 36 very calmly. She wore six-inch stiletto heels, brown leggings, a black coat and hat, and sunglasses.

And she had an expensive pair of very old-looking black combat boots hanging casually over her shoulder. How many hundred dollars did it cost to buy them, and how many hours of careful attention did it take to make them look so old?

Inside the warehouse, far away from the photographers, Ms Campbell changed into her boots and put on the uniform gloves, dust mask and fluorescent safety vest. After that, she was told what to do, and saw how horrible her punishment was going to be.

Albert Durrell, a sanitation department deputy chief, explained that she would have to sweep and wash the warehouse floor, the locker rooms and windows. And yes, he said, 'if they are dirty, she will clean the toilets."

But the press won't be able to watch her. The judge at her trial agreed she could stay indoors all week. This is partly because when pop star / DJ Boy George did community service on the street at the same station last summer, crowds of press photographers followed him all day.

'Let me make this clear," Mr Durrell said. 'This programme has been in Manhattan for over a year now. We've had a couple of celebrities, but the basic rule is to treat everyone with respect and dignity. They have a job to do and they do it well. So far so good, we haven't had any problems."

If Ms Campbell, or any of the three other offenders doing community service with her this week, didn't do what they were told, he added, they would be sent back in front of a judge.

Perhaps downtown Manhattan will remind Ms Campbell of her early life in Streatham, in south London, where there is lots of concrete, too. Pier 36 is opposite a line of red-brick tower blocks. And one of New York's busiest main roads runs just above the warehouse.

What will Ms Campbell learn from her stay under the bridge? Will she become nicer to the people who work in her house? Who knows? If nothing else, she may begin to respect the men and women who, up until this week, have kept the New York garbage out of her sight.