In Granada in Southern Spain, there are some new advertisements which ask men to help their wives with jobs in the home. These jobs include cooking, washing-up, cleaning and ironing clothes. In Spain, as in many other countries, many men think that jobs in the home are women's work. Many women, especially older women, like to serve the rest of the family. They work very hard to make the rest of the family comfortable.

Maria is nearly 60 years old and works full-time. She cleans the large building where I work, and she also works in the cafeteria. Her husband works there too,although his job is not so difficult. When Maria arrives home, very tired after a long day, her work starts again. The rest of the family can relax but she has to work. She cooks a meal and then does the ironing. Most of the clothes she has to iron belong to her five adult children, who still live at home with their parents. 

"It's not fair," Maria says, "but what can I do? When I ask them to help, they always have something more important to do . going out with friends, making phone calls." 

On the other hand, it is not true to say that all Spanish men are lazy at home. They also have their duties. My landlord, Pablo, is retired and does a lot of work at home but his wife never asks him to buy food at the market! The jobs in the home are clearly divided between Pablo and his wife. Pablo carries the washing up to the terrace but Emilia hangs it on the washing-line. Pablo waters the garden but Emilia cleans the house. 

Younger people are beginning to change but it is a slow process. I asked the men in my class of adult students to tell me how to cook a meal but they couldn't do it. "But I've never cooked anything," said 27-year old Javier. "My mother always cooks."

Here in Southern Spain men are men and women are women. There is no unisex fashion. Boys and girls do not wear the same clothes. 

In the summer, on warm evenings, the people of the town meet to talk together. The men stand on one side of the square and the women stand on the other. This is the tradition. 

In Spain there is a special celebration on April 23rd. It is called the Day of the Book. On this day you give books to your male friends as presents. To your women friends you give a rose. 

Letter from Spainfrom Barbara Lamplugh 