On a rainy night in Johannesburg a woman stops her car outside her house, gets out of the car and rings the doorbell. A man runs across the street, jumps into the vehicle and tries to drive away. The woman turns around and screams - her baby is on the back seat. She tries to grab the driver's door. The thief points his gun at her and fires. A bullet enters the mother's stomach and she falls to the ground. The thief drives away with her car and her baby. This is the beginning of the film Tsotsi - a South African film that won the Oscar for best foreign language film.

The film shows a crime that makes many South Africans very afraid - carjacking. Every year thousands of motorists lose their cars in carjackings in South Africa. The lucky ones just lose their cars. The unlucky ones are kidnapped, raped and murdered. 

Tsotsi is the story of a young thug from the Johannesburg township of Soweto who changes his life after kidnapping a baby by mistake. It is the latest in a new wave of South African films that look at crime and other aspects of modern society. 'Car hijacking is an especially rich subject. It is the meeting point between the rich and poor worlds.' says Guy Willoughby, a cultural commentator and writer. 

The highest number of carjackings was in 1998 when there were 16,000 cases. Now the number has fallen. There were 12,434 cases last year, and commentators say it shows South Africa is changing in the post-apartheid age. When apartheid ended in 1994 and democracy came to South Africa, there was a rapid increase in violent crime. Many white South Africans were very worried. 'In the late 1990s there was a lot of hysteria, almost a national panic. People thought car hijacking was a specific attack on the middle class,' said Antony Altbeker, a carjacking specialist. 'But now people are beginning to accept it.' 

South Africa's largest city, Johannesburg, was once the crime capital of the country but in the past two years crime has fallen by 35%. But hysteria returned for a few days last week when a gunman shot a pregnant woman twice in the stomach while she was sitting in a car and killed her unborn child.
 
Some carjackings are not really carjackings at all. Sometimes car-owners sell their cars to criminals and then tell the police that someone has stolen their car. They do this to get the insurance money. BMW has now introduced a lie-detector test with its insurance scheme and the number of insurance claims has fallen.
 
But it is clear that Tsotsi shows a real problem. Last Saturday three armed men attacked the film's director of photography, Lance Gewer, outside his Johannesburg home and stole his car. Police found the car and Mr Gewer's plane ticket to Los Angeles for the Oscar Awards hours later. Experts say that 40% of the stolen cars are broken up and the parts are then sold. Another 30% are re-registered, usually with the help of police or transport ministry officials, and sold in South Africa. The rest, particularly luxury 4x4s, are exported, often to eastern Europe.
 
There are usually more carjackings on Fridays because motorists are more relaxed at the beginning of the weekend. Some carjackers work alone, others work for syndicates. Last years the police arrested members of a syndicate with 22 members, including three junior police officers, who specialized in attacking women drivers for their jewellery. An estimated 20% of carjackings are violent. 

The film's writer and director, Gavin Hood, said that being the first South African film to win an Oscar 'tells me and all of us at home that we can do it. What we want, like everybody else, is just to tell our stories,' said the white South African. He said he wanted to show the despair and violence of post-apartheid South Africa and also to tell a universal morality tale. 'I hope more South African filmmakers will tell their stories now.'

