The Tata Group company in India is planning to produce the world's cheapest car. The car, called the Nano, has no radio, no boot, no airbag, no mirror on the passenger's side and just one long windscreen wiper. And if you want air-conditioning for the hot summers in India, you will have to buy the more expensive deluxe model of the Nano.

The Nano will be on sale later this year for 100,000 rupees (GBP1,260). The aim of the Nano is to make it possible for the billion people who live in India to enjoy motoring for the first time. 70-year-old Ratan Tata, the chairman of Tata, believes that the Nano is as important an event in the history of transport as the first flight or the first landing on the moon. But environmentalists say the new car will be a 'nightmare' and will make the air dirtier and cause traffic jams.

Like Henry Ford's Model T Ford in the 1930s, Tata's idea is to build a cheap car that is light and simple, but made from high-quality materials. The result is a small car which is just big enough for five people. The cheapest model is very basic: its price is low because it uses more plastic than steel. Other car manufacturers say the Nano may not meet safety standards, especially if the company plans to export it to Europe. Tata officials say it is easy to make the car stronger with metal plates to meet these safety standards.

Tata had the idea for the Nano four years ago but it has already brought big changes to the motor industry. Just a few days before Tata showed the car to the public for the first time, Ford said it was planning to increase its spending by $500m (GBP250m) a year to make India a centre of 'small-car manufacturing'. Last October, Renault said it was thinking about making a $5,000 car in India for export to the US. At first the Nano will only be on sale in India and experts say that India will soon be the fastest growing car market in the world. At the moment China is the fastest growing car market.

The Tata chairman's dream is a car for every Indian family. He says he used to watch families on motorbikes travelling through dusty streets: 'The father driving the scooter, his young kid standing in front of him, his wife sitting behind him holding a baby. I wanted to make a safe, cheap, all-weather form of transport for families like these."

The Nano costs just 100,000 rupees plus sales tax and is less than half the price of the next cheapest car on the road in India. It costs a bit more than a quality motorcycle. The economic boom in India means that people with money want to buy cars instead of motorcycles. If just 10% of motorcycle owners buy a Nano, there will be 1m extra cars on India's roads every year.

But environmentalists say the Nano could cause enormous damage to the environment. India's largest cities are now covered in smog. In Delhi traffic now moves at less than nine miles an hour - half the speed of ten years ago. Traffic jams are getting worse and car travel in cities is getting slower. At the same time cars are producing more and more greenhouse gases. In 2005, cars, buses and lorries in India produced 219m tonnes of carbon dioxide. Experts say that will increase by almost 700% to 1,470 tonnes by 2035 if the number of cars continues to grow.

The motor industry says that only seven or eight out of every 1,000 people in India have a car. In America more than 500 in every 1,000 people have a car. The number of private cars in India - about 13m - is only a little more than half the number of cars in America at the start of the 1930s. But the boom in motoring in India is already changing the shape of the country. Cities are growing into the countryside. The government is spending GBP35bn on new road projects. Companies are building car factories on farmland.

The Tata factory will produce 250,000 cars a year. Thousands of farmers lost their land when the new factory was built. Last month Shankar Patra, a 50-year-old farmer who lost his fields to the Tata factory, killed himself.'Without our fields we have no work. The village will die," said Patra's 22-year-old son, Pratap. 'We have nothing, but the rest of India will have a new car."

