In recent months downtown Manhattan has seen a new phenomenon ? you might call it 'disaster tourism'. Every day thousands of people crowd into its narrow streets, attracted to Ground Zero rising slowly out of the ashes of 9/11. This week, though, visitors expecting to take a close look at terrorist and economic catastrophe have been amazed to find something far more positive just around the corner.

It is a shop front in Nassau Street, a couple of blocks away from Wall Street, that would be completely ordinary without the two words on the shop window: Free Store. These days slogans like 'free store' usually mean the opposite - they are probably being used to market hyper-exclusive shops selling nothing under $1,000. But in this case free store is precisely what it says. Every item on offer inside the small shop is free. 
Anyone can come in off the street and browse through its goods, select an item and, if they think they need it, walk out with it completely free of charge.

Last week it traded a variety of goods, from kids' dresses and art supplies, to DVDs, posters, postcards and a huge stained-glass ceiling fitting. The shop is the creation of two artists, Athena Robles and Anna Stein, who launched it with the help of a $9,000 grant from a local cultural body and the September 11 fund. They began planning it 18 months ago but believe the timing of its opening now is very appropriate. "It's a certain time in history in this country when people really need to help each other out."

Within five minutes of the store opening its doors on Friday, it was packed with 'shoppers' browsing through its T-shirts, woolly scarves, baskets and boots. Robles and Stein explained that they were welcome to take whatever they liked, with the only condition being that they felt they "needed it". They noted down each transaction in their records and gave the customer a receipt as in any money-based shop.

Richard, a travel agent who works in Wall Street, chose a large framed photograph of Audrey Hepburn in Breakfast at Tiffany's. "It's a great time to be cheering people up with gifts, and why not?" he said. "The government has given money to the car companies and the banks, so it's nice to get something back for once." Kevin walked away with a free copy of a book called Great Sex Trips. So why did he feel he needed a book with a title like that? "Why not? There's always something to be learned."

Robles and Stein based their idea for the shop on the free stores that appeared in San Francisco and New York in 1967. They were set up by the hippy group the Diggers. In San Francisco, the Diggers set up two shops in the Haight-Ashbury district. There, returning Vietnam veterans exchanged their uniforms for hippy clothes and ate vegetable soup known as Digger Stew. The Diggers even set up free hospitals for those who did not have insurance, not to mention free concerts.

Stein and Robles don't have the same kind of ambitions as the 1960s Diggers, and their project is more artistic, where the Diggers were political and rebellious. But they do plan to keep the store open until the end of March, replenishing the free items with gifts from people who use the shop. "When we started I was worried we would run out of stuff," Robles said. "But after two days that's no longer a worry because people are bringing in bagfuls of lovely things."