The emoticon is 25 years old. In 1982, a Pittsburgh professor, Scott Fahlman, noted that his students' emails lacked body language and voice tones and could not express greetings and humour. So, the smiley was born, and with it a large amount of symbols intended to insert normal human emotion into the cold alphabet. A-Z might have been fine for Shakespeare, Milton, Keats and Shelley, but for today's global nerd it is not good enough.

Early telegraphy had its own short forms and users soon realized that abbreviated language could sometimes cause unintentional pain and embarrassment. Therefore, symbols were used to soften remarks that might seem sarcastic or abrupt. The result was not just smileys but frownies and various signs of confusion, love, anger and surprise. 

There are 16 pages of emoticons in Andrew John's Txtr's A-Z ? my favourite being }:-( which means 'your toupee is blowing in the wind'. These days many computers automatically change the frownie into ?. In other words, ?and ??have become formal symbols in Internet vocabulary. 

I agree that there is a problem. I have often sent a personal email or text message which I have regretted afterwards. The old-fashioned pen slowed the transition from spoken word (and intended meaning) to script. It gave you time to think, as did the manual typewriter. Writing involved effort. A word was thought about before being written on paper and sent through the post. 

These days, thoughts quickly change into finished, but imperfect sentences. As soon as they are on screen they become real. And 'send' is always clicked too soon. There is no wait for the post to go, no time to correct what you wrote. Nor is there any certainty that an email has arrived, so we have to call and ask: "Did you get my email ... why didn't you reply?" And then we regret sending it off so quickly. We should have read it through one more time. 

How on earth did we manage in the past? Somehow we communicated love, hurt, remorse, anger and joy with the help of the Oxford English Dictionary. We used quill, pen, pencil, ballpoint, even typewriter, and if anything went wrong we had the telephone as backup. But why is email so lacking in feeling that it needs its own additional emoticon alphabet? How believable is ??

The authors of a book on 'netiquette' say that, "On email people aren't quite themselves ... they are angrier, less sympathetic, less aware, more easily wounded, even more gossipy." Some have even wrecked their marriages, lost their jobs and ended up in jail.

Many of us do not know how to handle email. Do we start Dear Sir or Hi gorgeous, or get straight down to business? Do we cover the screen with capital letters, exclamation marks and emoticons in a desperate effort to explain what we mean? Do we end with Yours sincerely, Kind regards or Byeee!? Even such simple words as please, thank you and sorry have a hundred different meanings when spoken but are toneless when lying flat on the screen. 

The truth is that, for other than routine messages and acknowledgements, email is not as good as the telephone and the letter. Compared to the telephone, email distances us. It not only removes the tone of your voice, it prevents people from interrupting or replying. It is a one-way conversation, a monologue, with all the rudeness that can imply. Compared to a letter, email is faster but has none of the humanity, not to mention politeness, of handwriting. 

Emails are bad at conveying humour or criticism, bad news or sympathy. The form is too cold. Those who wish to communicate sincerity to another human being should telephone. Better still, clear your desk, take out a crisp sheet of note paper, pick up a pen and do something you may not have done for ages. Write a proper letter. The recipient will be amazed and delighted that you have taken the time. You will have written what you meant to say, and I bet you won't have used emoticons.

