British Prime Minister Tony Blair has announced he is stepping down after 10 years as prime minister and 13 as Labour leader. The prime minister told a crowd of supporters he would stand down as PM on June 27. In an emotional speech, he said the judgment on his 10-year administration was "for you, the people, to make". Mr Blair paid special tribute to his wife and children "who never let me forget my failings". But he concluded: "Hand on heart, I did what I thought was right. I may have been wrong - that's for you to decide. But I did what I thought was right for our country. This country is a blessed country. The British are special. The world knows it, we know it, this is the greatest country on earth."

He spoke directly about Iraq, which many people believe he will be most remembered for, saying: "The criticism since ... has been fierce, continuous and damaging." But he added: "The terrorists will never give up if we give up."

Mr Blair admitted that in May 1997, when Labour took over after 18 years of Conservative government, "people expected too much." But he added: "I would not want it any other way. I was, and remain, an optimist." Pointing to Africa, climate change and globalization, he declared Britain had changed under his 10-year leadership, saying: "Britain is not a follower, Britain is a leader." He did not say whether he would remain in parliament as an MP.

Mr Blair admitted that some people had accused him of being over-zealous but said that as prime minister, you were "alone with your instinct" over issues such as Sierra Leone, Kosovo and then Afghanistan and Iraq.

Earlier, the PM had confirmed to senior members of his government that he would announce his plans to step down, joking it was "not quite a normal day". The meeting ended with his colleagues banging the table in appreciation, according to Mr Blair's official spokesman. While Mr Blair flew to the north-east of England, the man who is likely to be the next prime minister was in the House of Commons, answering questions about the economy. "There are, of course, 600,000 job vacancies in the economy ? there's one more today actually as a result of announcements that have just been made," Gordon Brown joked to laughter from all sides.

People have already started paying tribute to the departing 54-year old prime minister, whose future plans are not yet clear. Former US secretary of state Colin Powell said Mr Blair had "an enormous impact on world politics, and he certainly has had an enormous impact on the special relationship between the United States and Great Britain. He has been a friend, he has been strong in the face of negative public opinion and in the face of crises. And we could always rely on his support."

Lindsey German, of the Stop the War coalition, said: "We cannot let this day pass without reminding people what Tony Blair did in going to war in Iraq, but this is about the future as well."

Meanwhile, the Liberal Democrats demanded an immediate general election to legitimize Mr Blair's successor. The party leader, Sir Menzies Campbell, has tabled a motion in the House of Commons, calling on the Queen to dissolve parliament immediately, since Mr Blair promised to serve a "full third term" in 2005. Mr Brown, leading a Labour Party that is short of money and that is doing very badly in the opinion polls, is highly unlikely to grant that request.

Mr Blair was unique among Labour leaders in winning three successive elections. Although announcing before the 2005 election that he would serve a "full third term", pressure from Labour MPs last autumn forced him to confirm he would stand down within a year. Now he has finally made that decision.