Last week's horrific shootings in the schoolhouse in Nickel Mines, Pennsylvania attracted an enormous amount of attention in the newspapers andon television. Looking at the television pictures, it was the little details that made you think. For example, the fact that the police had to use vans to take the parents to hospital to be at the bedsides of their children because they refused to go by police helicopter. The scene of worried mothers shyly peeking over the heads of television cameramen filming a press conference near the school while the pictures were being relayed instantly around the world. The parents had to be there in person as they had no televisions at home. There is something about those images of life in the Amish community of Lancaster county that is difficult for many people to understand. Apart from the horror of the killing of five girls by a milk truck driver, there is bewilderment. How is it possible, in this digital age where news travels at the speed of light, that people living just a few miles from the tragedy were still learning about the murders hours after they had happened?

Why did Charles Roberts decide to take revenge for an insult he suffered at the age of 12 on girls on the Amish community? The Amish are pacifist. At times of war they will undertake civilian duties but will not fight in the army. The community where Roberts committed the murders, 80km west of Philadelphia, has no police force and no guns. In the United States that is extremely unusual. Anyone who can remember Witness, the 1985 Harrison Ford film, will have a feeling for the setting of Lancaster county. Green rolling hills with black and white cattle, weather-beaten barns, plain, simple buildings, and black horse-drawn buggies. Add to that the 'plain' dress, as they call it and it all looks like what it is - a community of farmers that has hardly changed since the late 19th century. The word 'hardly' is important. Many people think the Amish are
completely opposed to everything modern.

In reality, the Amish are the product of change, some of it dramatic. They were originally Mennonites, a religion born in Switzerland in 1525, when the Mennonites broke away from the Protestants. Later, in Switzerland in 1693, the Amish broke away from the wider Mennonite community after a religious dispute. The Amish emigrated to Pennsylvania around the 1730s to after William Penn offered protection to persecuted religions. The Old Order of Amishes, the main group of people in Lancaster county, was then formed when they broke away from their fellow Amish in a disagreement over the technological changes brought by the industrial revolution. The Old Order was determined to take from technology only those elements that 
matched their interpretation of the Bible. 

"It is easy to get it wrong about the Amish," says Peter Seibert, president of the Heritage Centre of Lancaster county and a non-Amish. "They are not putting up walls to block out the modern world. What they are doing is adapting their community to modernity in order to preserve it as a simple farming society. They pick and choose what they want from our world".

So they do not have television, not because they think it is a modern evil but because they do not want their children to see sexual and violent images. They travel by buggy to keep the community together because they believe motor cars drive people apart. And there is some modernity in Lancaster county. They do not have phones in their houses, but they will have one in the shed where they have a woodworking business. They don't have electrical gadgets but they have battery-powered cash registers and even laptop computers. 

"Tourists can be quite disrespectful. They walk straight into Amish houses or schools thinking that they are there as a tourist attraction. They have no sense that this is a living community that greatly values its privacy", says researcher Stephen Scott. The joke is, as Scott points out, that the Amish are the ones who benefit. They may dislike being like zoo animals but they also make a great deal of money out of the flow of tourists.

These contradictory aspects of Amish life were clearly illustrated a couple of years ago when a reality TV company made a programme called Amish in the City, a show in which a group of Amish teenagers were taken out of their communities and transported to downtown LA. Yet the Amish faith was able to accept that. The teenagers were going through a period known as the "running around years", the period between the end of school, at the age of 14, and the entry into the church in one's late teens or early 20s.

In those five to eight years of freedom the children are not officially members of the church so they cannot be expelled from the church. The result is a successful community. 80% of the teenagers who move away from the community eventually return. The main problem for the Amish is now population growth, together with a lack of land for them to farm.

None of this will be any comfort to the parents and neighbours of the five girls who died in last week's shooting or the others who remain critically ill. Any comfort will come from their faith itself. Seibert puts it well: "For them this is God's will, and that is all. Our world is all about the individual. Their world is all about the community before God and the better life they will lead after death. That is difficult for us to understand, but that is how it is."