The The first guidebook of 'last chance' holidays will be published tomorrow for travellers who want to visit the most endangered tourist destinations across the world. Frommer's 500 Places To See Before They Disappear provides a list of sites where it is still possible to see rare and vulnerable animals, special landscapes and unique cultural sights.

Holly Hughes, one of the authors and a former executive editor of Fodor's Travel Publications, said: 'The devastation brought on by climate change and direct man-made interference is familiar to all of us. But this book is a carefully chosen list of last-chance destinations that travellers can enjoy - if they go soon ? for possibly the last time.'

According to Hughes and co-author Larry West, an award-winning investigative journalist, more than 20 of Britain's best-loved landmarks deserve a place in their book. The Tower of London and Greenwich Maritime Museum, for example, are at risk from rising sea levels which will cause the River Thames to flood. 

With 500 threatened destinations to choose from, she suggests that tourists go to the Everglades in southern Florida. Filled with rare species, this ecosystem is degenerating with alarming rapidity. Already half has been lost to agricultural and urban development. Low water levels and pollution have put what remains at risk. 'The number of birds has fallen by 93 per cent and many of the fish and even the alligators who remain have high mercury levels,' said Hughes. 

The Dead Sea may only be a tourist destination for three more decades. By then, says Hughes, 'it could be completely dry, because the rivers that run into it are being diverted'. Marine life around the Falkland Islands is in great danger from dumping by sanitation companies and ships. The Nazca lines in Peru, one of the world's most interesting and mysterious ancient sites, face destruction as roads are built and global warming and deforestation cause floods and mudslides. Also under threat is New York's Little Italy. Though a small part of the area, made famous by films such as The Godfather and Mean Streets, has been preserved, it is being gradually squeezed by the rapidly growing Chinatown and SoHo districts.'

Tourists should also visit some of Britain's ancient architectural treasures which, she says, risk becoming derelict because of a lack of money. Strawberry Hill, Sir Horace Walpole's folly in west London is trying to raise GBP8m. One of the oldest churches in England, St Mary's, in Stow in Lindsey, Lincolnshire, needs GBP3m for renovations. Another London landmark, Battersea power station, becomes more run-down every day as government, property developers and local community boards argue over its future.

Hughes also suggests a trip to Kentish Town, north London, to visit Little Green Street, one of the last complete Georgian streets in London. This perfect piece of Regency London was used as the setting for numerous music and photo shoots. Further north, the Holderness coast, in East Yorkshire, loses nearly 6ft (1.8 metres) a year due to rising sea levels caused by climate change and man-made interference, she said.

West points out that the guidebook's message is not all gloom. 'Some of the destinations are already on the road to being saved', he said. 'And even in the cases where a site has been lost, or irreversibly damaged, it often has become a place where activists meet and plan to fight on so that the same mistakes aren't made again. The planet is poorer every time we allow something beautiful to die.'