Mary Aciro has spent the day gathering grass to feed the cattle, weeding the vegetables and helping her mother cook dinner over a fire: the life of any African girl in any African village. But before the sun sets, Mary leaves the family's tiny mud hut and walks down a sandy track into the nearest town. The adults in the town of Lacor in northern Uganda are going home for dinner on buses. Mary and hundreds of other children are going the other way. They are dressed in rags and flip-flops; some carry sacks or rolled-up blankets on their shoulders. They are on the way to the night shelters, which are guarded by government troops.

In any other country, a 14-year-old girl leaving her home and an anxious mother for the night would cause rebellion. Here, it is necessary to survive. "We fear the rebels, we fear thugs and robbers who come at night to disturb us," says Mary as she walks. 

On a continent with many wars, the war in this region is particularly bad. It is Africa's longest civil war, and perhaps the only conflict in history in which children are both the main victims and the main attackers. Mary and the other children walk to safety every night because they fear, with good reason, abduction by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), a religious rebel group that uses children as soldiers, porters and sexual slaves. The LRA attacks the villagers at night, killing adults and forcing children to beat their parents before taking them away to camps deep in the bush. 

Mary's 15-year-old brother, Geoffrey, was abducted by the rebels. He was held for three months. "They made him carry heavy things, beat him at times, gave him no food," says their mother, Agnes. Geoffrey only escaped when a government helicopter attacked the rebel camp he was in. Mary's neighbour, a girl named Florence, was abducted too. She spent three years with the rebels: she was forced into sexual slavery and became pregnant. 

In 2002, desperate parents in northern Uganda began sending their children.about 40,000 of them.into nearby towns at night. Aid agencies built shelters to give them somewhere safe to go, and it's one of these that Mary is going to. Mary lives near the town, but some of the other children walk for hours to reach safety. When she reaches the shelter, it is already full of children of all ages. The shelter is made up of concrete buildings and giant white canvas tents. 

Lillian Apiyo, 14, is already inside. "I come here for protection," she says. "I always get new friends from here. There is nowhere to stay at home." The children walk through the gates looking sad, but a party atmosphere soon develops. A dozen or so children begin dancing. At other shelters, they sing songs that cheer them up. The children are not given anything to eat. The shelters are busy enough as it is, and if food were provided, they would be even busier. 

Adult wardens patrol with torches, stopping occasional fights and checking on children who look scared or upset. "When I am here, I feel I am somebody," says Gabriel Oloya. "When I am at home, I'm always upset. Here, I forget my worries." Gabriel, 15, is responsible for the four younger brothers who walk with him to the shelter. "My parents are dead, killed by the rebels," he says. 

Childhood is short in rural Africa, but it is even shorter in this society damaged by the war. The children who come to the shelters are in need of affection. Many of them live with their extended family because their parents were murdered by the rebels. 

In the shelter the wardens keep boys and girls apart, but outside its gates young couples are alone in the semi-darkness. This sort of thing worries Mary's mother. "We can't follow our children up to the shelter," Agnes says. "Sometimes a girl says she has gone there, but she has gone to a boyfriend, and she becomes pregnant and leaves school." But then there is more to worry about than teenage boys. The tribes of northern Uganda were once farmers who kept cattle and grew maize. But 19 years of war have destroyed everything: almost the entire population of the north, 1.5 million people, now live in crowded temporary shelters on the outskirts of towns. There is alcoholism and violence, and the horror of war is part of everyday life. 

The hope of returning to a normal life is slowly disappearing. This is a culture with few written records. When their parents are gone, the children's link with their villages will be lost. Who will tell the children the boundaries of farmland or the distance to the nearest stream? "For me, the worst thing that may happen here is a situation where there is no war, but everybody stays in the camps," says Father Carlos Rodriguez Soto, a Roman Catholic priest who has spent 18 years in Uganda.

The wardens wake up the children before the sun rises. After a prayer and a wash, some children roll their blankets on to their shoulders and the older ones gather up younger brothers and sisters. They walk out of the gates on to the road. By 9 am the sun will burn, but now it is gentle. It is a good time to walk home. 