A recent survey of women MPs in the British Parliament shows that many male MPs have very old-fashioned views about women. The survey was based on interviews with 83 current and recent MPs and it contains some frank comments about certain male MPs making sexist remarks and gestures as women try to speak in the House of Commons, the lower chamber of the British Parliament. 

The study is called Whose Secretary Are You, Minister?. It was prepared by Professor Joni Lovenduski of Birkbeck College, London, and Margaret Moran MP. They collected more than 100 hours of taped interviews, which will be placed in the British Library. 

When Gillian Shephard arrived in the House of Commons as a new Tory (Conservative) MP in 1987 she was confused when she and her fellow women MPs were called Betty. "There was a Conservative MP who called us all Betty," she says, "and when I said, 'Look, you know my name isn't Betty', he said, 'Ah, but you're all the same, so I call you all Betty, it's easier'." 

Barbara Follett says: "I remember some Conservatives making sexist comments and gestures every time a Labour woman got up to speak." When a large number of female MPs -120 in all - arrived in the House of Commons after Tony Blair's election victory in 1997, Labour's Claire Curtis-Thomas thought that the red ribbons tied to coat hangers were for Aids day. Later she learnt they were for MPs to hang up their swords. 

Another new MP, Yvette Cooper, found it hard to make Commons officials believe that she was not a researcher or a secretary. Jackie Ballard, a Liberal Democrat who left parliament at the last election, remembers a well-known Tory MP who constantly made sexist remarks, "maybe about someone's legs or someone being a lesbian ... if he worked for me he'd probably be sacked". The same MP once said, while drunk in the House of Commons, that he'd like to "make love to" a nearby woman. 

The interviews show how even after the arrival of the "Blair babes", female MPs were expected to concentrate on "women's issues", such as health and education. Several complain of the humiliation they experienced when they entered traditionally male territory. When Labour's Dari Taylor resigned from the defence committee - one of only two women on it - the chairman, Bruce George, stood up and said: "Well, I have to make this announcement: one down, one to go." 

Many women MPs were astonished by the negative reactions of their male colleagues. Even male MPs who publicly supported sexual equality were furious when they saw women getting promotion. One current member of the government was asked, when she was promoted: "Oh, you've had a very fast rise, who have you been sleeping with?" Male MPs and officials seemed unwilling to accept the new Labour women, many of them in their 30s and 40s. Some simply could not believe that such young women could be members of parliament. 

Many female MPs say that things have improved since the introduction of "family friendly" hours. The old male drinking culture is gradually disappearing. But it isn't perfect yet. Sarah Teather, the new Liberal Democrat MP, says: "Lots of people say it's similar to an old boys' club. I've always said, to me it feels rather more like a teenage public school* -- you know, a public school full of teenage boys." 

The thing that makes women MPs furious is that their achievements are not recognised. They say that they have brought a new feminised agenda to British politics, in particular, the fact that childcare is now at the top of the domestic agenda. They mention several other successful policies too, in particular parental leave. 

* Note: In the UK, so-called 'public' schools are not public at all. They are private schools for the children of rich parents.