Most Zimbabweans who can leave the country have already left or at least made plans to leave. Most of those who leave go to South Africa, pretending to be tourists or traders. But people try to go anywhere where they might find work: Namibia, Botswana, London. Without the money these exiles send back to their families in Zimbabwe, the economy of the country would collapse completely. Zimbabwe has the world's highest inflation rate and has no hard currency to pay for basic services.

President Robert Mugabe tries to present a picture of a booming country with plenty of food but some of his most loyal comrades are warning him that this is a delusion as inflation wipes out the middle class and children die of malnutrition. The brutal reality of Zimbabwe was clearly shown when the leader of the opposition, Morgan Tsvangirai, and others were severely beaten by the police and arrested on their way to a mass protest against the government. The opposition described the beatings as a turning point in the struggle to force Mr Mugabe from power. 

Many ordinary Zimbabweans are not so sure. To them the president still looks firmly in power. Popular confidence in the opposition has been falling over the years since it failed to take advantage of the anger many people felt when Mr Mugabe stole the 2002 presidential election. Today, daily life in the countryside is a struggle to find food to eat and the money for medicines and to keep the children in school. People also fear that Mr Mugabe's Zanu-PF party will again use food as a political weapon against his most vulnerable opponents. 

It is not only the poor who rely on money from abroad. Even in some of Zimbabwe's larger cities, such as Bulawayo, a once prosperous middle class has almost disappeared in the fastest shrinking economy in the world. A couple of years ago there was no food in the supermarkets. Today there is food in the supermarkets but the problem now is that people do not have the money to buy it. 

Felix Mafa, a 60-year-old former college lecturer in Bulawayo, has sold his cars and relies on a son who is a doctor in the US and another who is a shop manager in Namibia to send money to feed the rest of the family. "I am no longer independent. I am supported by my children," he said. "I'm a professional. I had cars and two houses. I sold my cars to pay for my other children to go to school. I gave one of my houses to my eldest son. He is married and cannot afford a bed, let alone a house." 

White-owned farms once provided the food that fed Zimbabwe. They were seized by force and given to small-scale black farmers and the ruling party elite. Mr Mugabe has described the redistribution of the white-owned farms as "completed successfully". He has said that the farmers have produced a "bumper harvest". Zimbabwe's president has also boasted that the economy is no longer under foreign control and his finance minister has predicted economic growth this year. 

But Mr Mugabe's ally, the reserve bank governor, Gideon Gono, described the reality of the situation. He told parliament that he is struggling to maintain electricity supplies. He said there is no money to keep air force planes in the air, or to put police cars on the road. And 300,000 people are waiting for passports because there is no paper or ink to issue them. Mr Gono warned that inflation could drive Zimbabwe's economy down "to levels never dreamt before". The International Monetary Fund (IMF) predicts that prices could rise by 4,000% this year. 

The reserve bank governor said he received constant requests from food and petrol distributors, the national airline and the railways for foreign currency. There is almost no hard currency in Zimbabwe now because tobacco exports, once Zimbabwe's biggest source of US dollars, have fallen by 80% since the farms were taken over. The other big earner, tourism, has almost disappeared. Mr Gono said the power company told him: "If you don't give us money the nation will be in darkness." 

But there is no money and the bank has to use its hard currency to buy maize to prevent a famine. As a result of drought and mismanagement, Zimbabwe has less than half of the maize it needs to feed the country. "If we were talking about local currency, I would say, 'Don't worry, in the next 30 minutes we will print money,'" said Mr Gono. But he said he cannot print American dollars or British pounds.

Zimbabwe's doctors went on strike for weeks because their salaries were worth just seven cans of baked beans a month. They returned to work only after their pay was increased to about GBP110 a month - while two-thirds of the population lives on 60p or less a day. Many hospitals have lost more than half their doctors. Nurses often come to work no more than twice a week because they cannot afford the bus fares. Bulawayo's main hospital, the UBH, has such a shortage of medicines that patients have to bring their own. "Patients are dying of dehydration because there are no drips," said a doctor. "We can't treat diabetes any more. The nurses are unhappy because there are no gloves when they are handling patients with AIDS."

