For more than 10 years President Jacques Chirac of France has dreamt of a French 24-hour television news channel to act as a rival to English-speaking channels such as BBC World and CNN. Now, after many years of disagreements and internal problems, the channel will finally be launched, promising a revolution in world news reporting.
 
France 24 intends to report international news 'through French eyes'. It will offer a French perspective on world events from the Middle East to Madagascar, and also aims to reflect the French way of life. It will explain the news with typical French TV debate shows where philosophers discuss current affairs. Test programmes have included topics from Rwanda to the French rugby team or the changing tastes for Beaujolais nouveau wine.

At least 20% of the programming will focus on culture and lifestyle, including everything from world museums to cuisine, fashion and French chocolate. It will broadcast simultaneously on two channels, in English and French. But broadcasting in English will not affect the French character of the channel. France 24 executives hope the English debate shows will be even more heated than the French. The channel also plans to broadcast in Arabic and Spanish. 

Mr Chirac first had the idea of a French 24-hour news channel when he was prime minister in the late 1980s. It was then one of his election promises for the presidency in 2002. The following year, when Mr Chirac criticized the American preparations for war in Iraq, he was attacked by the media in the US and Britain. People clearly saw the need for a news channel with a French voice. Mr Chirac now wants to launch it as one of the projects that continue France's struggle against the global dominance of the US. Earlier this year he announced plans for a Franco-German search engine to compete with Google and Yahoo, called Quaero, Latin for I search. 

But although the president will launch France 24 at a gala in Paris, the station's chief executive, Alain de Pouzilhac, says the station will not become 'Chirac TV'. "We have public money but we are an independent channel," he says. The centre-right presidential hopeful Nicolas Sarkozy will also not be able to use the channel to broadcast his views. "I know Nicolas very well. I don't believe we will have a problem with that. He hasn't called me," Mr Pouzilhac added. 

The channel wants to have a similar number of viewers to al-Jazeera's English service, about 75 million households in more than 90 countries, and describes itself as a 'third way' between the Qatar-based al-Jazeera and CNN. 

But the birth of France 24 has not been easy. It is a partnership between France Televisions, the country's public broadcaster, and TF1, one of Europe's largest private TV channels, two groups which are normally rivals. There have been several protests by trade unions and management disagreements ? there have even been disagreements over the channel's name. Some French politicians believe the station will not generate enough income to compete internationally. 

France 24's pictures will mainly come from its parent TV stations as well as other partners such as the main French news agency and Radio France International, which has led some people to say that it will just be a summary of other channels' content. France 24 will have a team of 170 journalists of an average age of 30 and public funding of E86m (GBP58m) for the first year, France 24 is much smaller than its competitors. CNN has a budget of E1.2bn and a staff of 4,000.

But journalists at its headquarters say the station will influence world politics. Mark Owen, who will present the English morning news bulletins and debate show, said: "Look at the conflict in Lebanon this summer. If Jacques Chirac's call for a ceasefire - which wasn't reported by the BBC or CNN - had been reported earlier, it could have ended the conflict earlier. If Chirac's call had been reported more widely, it maybe could have saved thousands of lives. That was a story that needed a French angle, with France's historic links to Lebanon." 

The France 24 website will launch tonight and the station goes live tomorrow. There will be a 10-minute news bulletin each half hour and between the news bulletins, magazine programmes with topics including 'humanitarian affairs', lifestyle, culture, and a monthly show on economics and business. The Week in France will discuss politics and society, and other weekly specials will come from Asia, the Americas, Africa and the Middle East.

Outside the shining new building, the critical reaction has been favourable. Guillaume Parmentier, director of the French Centre on the United States, said: "It's not an anti-American operation. It's more than that. France didn't have an international news channel while many other countries have them. What is remarkable is that is has taken such a long time for France to get one."
