It is Osama bin Laden's 50th birthday today. He is probably hiding somewhere in the tribal lands between Pakistan and Afghanistan. One can almost imagine the grey-bearded jihadi sitting in his cave with a birthday cake, with his smiling comrades around him. In reality it probably won't be much of a party. Muslims from the Wahhabi branch of Islam like bin Laden disapprove of birthday parties, believing such celebrations to be a vulgar western import. But as he reaches the age of 50, he at least has reason to enjoy a quiet smile.

Six years after 9/11, bin Laden has still not been captured, despite the world's largest manhunt and a $25m reward offered for information leading to his capture. A powerful myth has grown around him - the tall Saudi-born militant is now the ghost of the Hindu Kush, sometimes reported dead and sometimes alive at different points inside the remote mountain range. The Pakistani army thought it had trapped him in a village in North Waziristan in 2003. A year later the Spanish newspaper El Mundo said it had located him in a Muslim area of western China. One US senator announced that Bin Laden had died in the huge earthquake that recently struck northern Pakistan. 

At about the same time, an undercover team of American investigators arrived in Chitral, a quiet mountain area in the north of Pakistan, where they believed bin Laden was hiding. Soon afterwards angry clerics told local people who they were and they had to leave. Bin Laden is also said to be ill with kidney problems. Last September a French newspaper reported he had died of typhoid. 

America's spies are convinced OBL, as they call him, is hiding in Pakistan's tribal region. "As far as we know the senior leadership, number one and two, are there," said the new director of national intelligence, last week. ABC News reported last Tuesday that the CIA is sending new teams to trap him. But if the Americans think he is in the border areas, the tribesmen who live there think the opposite. Over the border in Afghanistan many people believe that bin Laden has already been caught by America - and is even hidden inside the White House. "Many, many people believe such stories," said Sarah Chayes, a writer who lives in Kandahar. If America really has such strong soldiers and powerful satellites, they believe they must have captured bin Laden. 

Most Afghans do not support the man who caused the invasion of their country in 2001. According to a recent opinion poll, nine out of 10 people have a negative opinion of him. But elsewhere in the Muslim world many people admire him. "Osama is a hero," said Kamran Ali, a 23-year-old from Islamabad. "Americans have done many bad things against Muslims. Osama stands up to them." Like many Pakistanis he does not believe that bin Laden was linked to the World Trade Centre attacks. "There's no proof of that," he said. 

All over the Muslim world people feel the same way, said Abdel Bari Atwan, editor of the al-Quds al-Arabi newspaper. But, he said, support for bin Laden does not mean that people are voting for terrorism. "When people in Palestine voted for Hamas it was not for radicalism, they voted against corruption. This is the same. Because people hate American foreign policy and corrupt Arab dictatorships they sympathize with al-Qaida and Osama bin Laden. It doesn't mean they approve of al-Qaida's actions or September 11," he said. 

Is bin Laden dead? Mullah Dadullah, a Taliban commander, says he has been in touch. "We exchange messages to share plans," he said in one of two recent interviews. "It's very hard for 

anyone to see bin Laden himself now but we know he's still alive." The Emir, as bin Laden is known to followers, is becoming increasingly bold. As-Sahab, the al-Qaida video production house, released more than 20 audio and videotapes from bin Laden and his deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri, in 2006. 

"The messages are often long and complicated. Most of the time bin Laden uses silence much more effectively," said Michael Scheuer, former head of the CIA's bin Laden unit. "The silence suggests they are ready to attack again. It is a very powerful and sophisticated approach," he said. Meanwhile, in the mountain forests and remote valleys of the tribal region, the hunt continues.

