Foreign visitors to Japan can find a variety of sandwiches not available at most local fast food restaurants back home, but Lucky Pierrot, a restaurant chain based in the port of Hakodate, has decided to increase its range of products. It is now selling whaleburgers, burgers made with whale meat.

The restaurant serves 16 different varieties of hamburgers and 10 different kinds of curry and 12 different kinds of ice cream. Almost everyone in the shop, near the waterfront in Hakodate, is around high school or college age. It's nearly 3.30pm and the friendly owner had told me the day before that, as only 20 whaleburgers a day were available, they could be sold out by the time I arrived. 

I go to the counter and find that I'm in luck. After paying for the order and receiving a ticket (number 97), I sit down and wait for my number to come up. When the whaleburger arrives, it is deep fried and placed on a bun with lettuce and mayonnaise. It is black and chewy. The cost is 380 yen ($3.35). I look around to see if I am the only one eating a whale. It seems that I am. 

Selling whaleburgers was not originally Lucky Pierrot's idea. Earlier this year the restaurant sent out a survey asking customers what new foods they would like to see on the menu. The responses to the survey showed that most people wanted "Ghengis Khan" burgers. In Japanese-English, this means thin strips of barbecued lamb, which is very popular in the province of Hokkaido. The second most popular choice was whale. 

Whaling has a long history in Japan, and whale meat is easy to find in any port, such as Hakodate, so it is perhaps not surprising that somebody would start selling whaleburgers. Hakodate is one of the most beautiful cities in Japan and has a long association with whales ? it was the port where Japanese whaleships used to land their catches. 

Now the city is a popular destination for Japanese tourists wanting to escape the sweltering summers in other parts of the country. Shops across the harbour provide them with a range of seafood; huge frozen whole salmon, live crabs and a package clearly labelled "whale bacon". Beside it sits a small can of something called "red meat" in Japanese. When I ask him, a fishmonger says it means whale. 

Traditionally, coastal cities in Japan have been the main market for whale meat. But many older Japanese living in the big cities also have good memories of whale meat. Just after the Second World War, there wasn't much food and people were starving to death in cities like Tokyo. Whale meat kept many people alive. In addition, whale oil was given to a generation of Japanese children as a vitamin supplement. 

It is this combination of postwar memories and a desire to preserve the ancient traditions of coastal whaling that is making whale meat more popular. But while Lucky Pierrot may be unique in selling it in burger form, whale meat in Hakodate is quite common. The ninth day of each month is "Whale Day", when shops and local restaurants offer reductions on their usual prices. 

Later I meet with Inge Arnold, a young Australian woman, and her friend Takashige Arai at a local sushi restaurant. Arnold, who worked briefly in the Hakodate fish market, doesn't eat the whale sushi we ordered. But Arai and I eat it. This whale meat is different from the whaleburger. It is red, tender and juicy, and has a taste, we agree, that is somewhere between tuna and mackerel.

Hakodate fish merchants know that the killing of whales is unpopular in some parts of the world but they are confused and sometimes defensive, when they meet protests by anti-whaling campaigners. After news of Lucky Pierrot's whaleburgers spread, the restaurant's management received hundreds of angry letters and emails. "We're not unique. Whale meat is widely available at many places in Japan," said Miku Oh, a spokesman for Lucky Pierrot. 

Opinion polls show that the majority of the Japanese public are against a comprehensive whaling ban. A survey of 5,000 people, conducted by the country's Fisheries Agency in 2001, found that only 22.6% of those asked were in favour of a complete whaling ban, while 39% were against a ban. 

In truth much of the meat available in Hakodate, and Japan in general, is not from whales found in local waters but those killed for research in waters as far away as Antarctica. The Japanese government points out that the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling requires that the by-products of whale research be processed, and that selling whale meat fulfils the treaty obligation and helps to pay for the cost of the research. 

However, not everyone likes the taste of whale meat. After growing up on a diet of fast food, not many young people seem to like it. "Right now, I'd say most of my friends prefer other forms of seafood to whale. Especially here in Hakodate, where salmon and crab are so widely available," said Jun Matsuda, a college student from Tokyo who was visiting with his friends. "Whale meat is what my parents ate when they were young, and they said it wasn't very good. I've not seen the whaleburger, and I don't think I want one."