After 20 year's of falling sales, the fur trade in Britain is growing again. In the 1990s consumers who were conscious of their image refused to buy fur. But new industry figures show that sales went up by 35% in the UK last year - the biggest single increase since the early 1980s.

There has been so much demand for fur that some furriers have already sold out of stock, weeks before the Christmas shopping period reaches its peak. In London there has not been so much fur in shop windows for 20 years. Fur retailers believe that last month's shocking image of pop singer Sophie Ellis Bextor with a skinned fox will not have a negative effect on fur sales. They believe that its sudden popularity is due to a new generation of consumers who are rebelling against the anti-fur movement and the political correctness of the 90s.

Leading fashion houses have also been promoting mink and fox fur. So far this year, there have been more than 300 appearances of fur products at fashion shows. Stars such as Jennifer Lopez, Madonna, P Diddy, and the model Kate Moss have worn fur in public. This is very different from the time when women wearing fur coats were in danger of having paint thrown at them in public while the world's supermodels said they would "rather go naked" than wear animal skins.

Fashion historian Judith Watt, who specialises in the history of fur, believes that women in their twenties and thirties have opened up a new market for fur. "A generation that grew up as children of the anti-fur movement are now rebelling against it", she says. "They are bored with being politically correct. It doesn't mean they haven't got a conscience; they just want to make up their own minds".

During the successful protests by the anti-fur movement in the mid-90s, about 90% of fur shops were forced to close down. But despite the growing acceptance of fur, the decision of 23-year-old Bextor to pose for the photograph for the animal welfare charity People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (Peta), suggests that many people are still strongly opposed to fur. After the publication of the picture of her with the bloody remains of a fox last month, more than 50,000 people visited the Peta web-site in three days. Peta said that the fur trade was cruel, claiming that as many as 50 animals are killed by electrocution, poisoning or gassing just to make one single coat. "The fur industry wants to hide the cruelty; Sophie's picture shows the reality," says Dawn Carr, who is the director of Peta. "Cruelty will never be fashionable".

Last month the organisation was also in the news when a group of Peta activists attacked the fur industry's latest star, the supermodel Gisele Bundchen, at a New York fashion show. They were angry about Bundchen's decision to take part in an advertising campaign for the US fur 
company Blackglama in exchange for $500,000 and two black mink coats. 
