The British Parliament have voted to end almost 700 years of fox-hunting in England and Wales and a total ban on hunting with dogs will come into force. Pro-hunt supporters promised a series of protests against the decision. 1,000 people demonstrated outside Windsor Castle where the Queen was hosting a dinner for theFrench president and the British prime minister. 

The British prime minister accepted that his efforts to delay the ban until after the general election had failed. There are 318 registered hound packs in England and Wales, including 184 foxhound packs. Around 8,000 jobs depend on hunting, while 15,000 to 16,000 people, such as hotel owners, could also be affected by the ban. The government and police forces around the country must now prepare for the possibility of protests. 

There was a lot of political manoeuvering by both pro- and anti-hunters in Parliament as each side tried to present the other side as the enemies of compromise and common sense. The government made one final attempt to reach a compromise, trying to delay the measure in order to give hunts time to adjust to their closure. Some Labour MPs suspected that the government was trying to avoid the promised ban on hunting. Finally the rural affairs minister persuaded MPs to vote to offer the compromise measure to the House of Lords for approval. 

By a majority of 151 the MPs agreed to delay the implementation of the fox-hunting bill. The House of Lords voted to reject the delay. This meant that the House of Commons had no alternative but to use the Parliament Act of 1949 to overrule the decision made by the House of Lords. 

The British prime minister said he regretted the outcome of the votes. He accepted that hunting would now be a legal and election issue: "There are people who feel passionately that hunting is an essential part of their way of life. There are people who feel equally passionate that it is barbaric and cruel." 

There is now the possibility of a conflict between police, hunters and landowners before the next UK general election. The rural affairs minister called on pro-hunt supporters to accept the decision of Parliament. "The hunting community say they are law-abiding people, so we expect those involved in hunting to cease their activity when they are required by law to do so," he said. However, the Conservative rural affairs spokesman called for mass legal disobedience. 

The chief executive of the Countryside Alliance, was furious to see his seven-year battle fail. The alliance began a legal challenge against the ban, saying it was confident it could prove that the 1949 Parliament Act had always been illegal, although it has been used four times. 

Meanwhile there was further confusion last weekend when the home secretary said police would need more time to gather information about pro-hunt protestors and suggested that riders would not be prosecuted for killing foxes unless it was clearly intentional. He said he had wanted a delay on the ban to allow detailed preparations to deal with the expected mass disobedience. 

Police say that opposition to the new law will mean a huge amount of work for small rural police forces. 