Susan McDonald doesn't look like an activist. She drives a nice car, wears smart clothes and during office hours is the neighbourhood personal banker. But after work McDonald has another life. It is then that the mother of three turns into a neighbourhood organizer, encouraging people in her community to fight for a way of life that many believe is in danger.

McDonald, who calls herself a suburbanite, is president of the Franklin Reserve Neighbourhood Association in the city of Elk Grove, 15 miles south of the Californian capital, Sacramento. Franklin Reserve, a collection of large houses on anonymous cul-de-sacs with unlikely names - Snow Leopard Circle, Fox Trotter Way - is at the heart of what some call 'the fight for suburbia'.

The mortgage foreclosure crisis, along with demographic changes, rising fuel prices and other factors could mean the end for the suburbs. The term 'slumburbia' was not far behind.

At Franklin Reserve, a walled community of 15,000 people, there are signs that all is not well. Some front lawns are overgrown and untidy, and there are many 'for sale' signs and signs offering properties for rent. On Caprezzo Way a five-bedroom, three-bathroom house, complete with pool, is on the market for $550,000, probably $100,000 less than a year ago. Across the street a more ominous sign of the mortgage foreclosure crisis is taped to the gate of a house on Cortino Way. 'Notice to quit,' it declares, telling the occupants, who couldn't pay their mortgage, they have three days to leave.

McDonald moved to Elk Grove four years ago, attracted by suburban life; a new home in a new location, with award-winning schools. Elk Grove had the reputation of being a friendly, family-oriented community." But once the mortgage crisis started to bite, McDonald began to notice changes.

"I took my kids for a walk in the park and saw some graffiti," she says. Soon after, McDonald and seven others decided to form a neighbourhood association. Today, the group has 400 members, a lawn-mowing task force and a lively online message board.

But long grass is the least of suburbia's problems, according to Christopher Leinberger, an urban theorist who wrote an analysis of the problem in the Atlantic Monthly. He argues that suburbia is doomed: "For the past 50 years we've left the city and headed to the suburbs," he says. "Now people are moving back, aided by $4 per gallon gas."

The move back to the towns and cities has also been helped by cultural and demographic changes, says Leinberger. Couples are having children later in life, so they don't need a suburban house with five bedrooms and a huge garden. Many potential house buyers also prefer the concept of being able to walk to where they want to go; in suburbia they have to drive everywhere. 

"Transport now accounts for 19% of household costs, compared to 3% a hundred years ago," says Leinberger. "At some point this country has to get serious about reducing carbon emissions." 

But what most alarms urban theorists is what might become of developments like Franklin Reserve once people can no longer afford to live there. Unlike the inner city that was abandoned in the latter half of the last century, it is hard to adapt suburban developments to other uses. "These spaces are custom-made for residential purposes only," says Leinberger. "They don't convert easily to retail or office or hotel."

