It is a daring scientific project that could offer hope to 300 million malaria sufferers worldwide. The plan is to genetically modify the mosquitoes in countries with malaria, so that the insects can no longer carry the malaria parasite ? and so can't pass it to people. Without its taxi service, the disease would soon die out.
 
The release of genetically modified insects is not a new idea but this week, work from a team at Johns Hopkins University in Maryland gave it fresh importance. The scientists there cannot yet prove what would actually happen if GM mosquitoes were released into the wild. However, their lab studies suggest that insects carrying a gene that resists malaria would not simply die out as soon as they met normal mosquitoes ? and might even start to take over. 

Many human lives might be saved. But what would happen if millions of GM-insects were released into the wild? When the mosquitoes are in their natural habitat, would the gene they carry jump into other species? Large scale releases of GM animals have never been carried out, so these questions are hard to answer. 

However, the long list of ecological disasters that have followed both deliberate and accidental releases of non-native species into new environments will make scientists ? and non-scientists ? extremely careful. 

"If new species get out of their ecosystem and are not kept under control by other processes, they start to cause trouble," says Deborah Long at Plantlife Scotland. New species may have no natural predators, or may encounter prey that cannot defend themselves against their hunting methods. New species can also affect local 
plants and animals by bringing in diseases they have not met before. 

"This is a particular problem for islands in the southern hemisphere," says Andre Farrar, a spokesman for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. In the past, small oceanic islands in the southern hemisphere didn't usually have any land-based predators because mammals simply couldn't get there, and many bird species nested on the ground. So when European explorers introduced rats, dogs, pigs and cats to the islands, the birds' eggs were easy prey. When the brown tree snake (native to Australia) was accidentally introduced to Guam in the western Pacific in the 1950s, for example, it devastated local bird populations. 

When Portuguese sailors brought animals to Mauritius, they probably caused the extinction of the dodo. 

There are many examples of disasters. In Australia, rabbits were introduced and quickly multiplied, destroying native species. They are still a major problem. The African honeybee was introduced to Brazil in the 1950s and spread, replacing the European honeybees that came to South America with the first Europeans. It is much more aggressive than native species, attacking people and animals. In Africa, the water hyacinth plant was introduced from South America in the 19th century. It now blocks rivers, making them impassable. 

Even in this country, foreign invaders are a huge problem for conservationists. The worst one is Japanese knotweed, which grows well in gardens. Dr Long says it causes enormous problems for home owners, because it can grow through walls and concrete, as well as taking over gardens. 

Another problem plant is rhododendron ponticum, which is taking over the so-called 'Celtic rainforest' woodlands of the west coast of Scotland and Wales. It damages the special plants there, which need precise amounts of light and water. The invading rhododendrons, which were introduced by Victorian gardeners, shade out the native plants. 

The destructive cane toad of Australia is also the result of a failed attempt at biological control. The toad was brought in to control sugar-cane pests in 1935. But it soon began preying on ? and destroying ? native species. It now occupies much of the north east of Australia. Getting rid of the invasive species is often much more difficult than introducing it. Despite continuing efforts to control the cane toads, their apparently unstoppable march continues. 

Perhaps the worst example of a disastrous introduction is that of the snails of French Polynesia. In 1975, the wolf snail was deliberately introduced to stop the spread of the previously introduced giant African land snail. But the predatory wolf mostly ignored its intended prey and instead developed a taste for the smaller native partula snails. Since then, 72% of the partula species have become extinct and only five remain. 

But there have been successes, especially on the islands where introduced species can cause most damage. "It is expensive, it is time-consuming but is potentially very effective," says Farrar. The ground-nesting kakapo parrot from New Zealand, for example, has been given new life by moving it to islands without rats.

So what are the lessons here for introducing GM-mosquitoes? Perhaps, putting a new mosquito with an extra gene into a place where there are lots of mosquitoes already is not as bad as introducing an entirely new species with hunting methods, immune defences and diseases that are entirely new to the local animals. That change may not be very different from something that has happened countless times in evolution ? a change to a gene that has happened by chance. 

Finally, though, it will probably be what people think is a risk, rather than the actual risks, that matters. GM-crops had no chance in Europe because of 'what-if?' fears: in the end, scientists' opinions had no effect. If public opinion in African countries is strongly against the GM-mosquito, or if people feel that a technology rejected by Europe is being forced onto them, it will never happen.
