Dmitry Medvedev has become Russia's new president and the country's third post-Soviet leader during a ceremony at the Kremlin which ? formally at least ? ended Vladimir Putin's eight years in power. Standing next to Mr Putin, Medvedev gave a speech promising to improve the lives of ordinary Russians, fight corruption and promote the rule of law. He said: "I'm going to pay special attention to the fundamental role of the law. We must achieve a true respect in law and overcome problems with the law which are hampering modern development." He also promised to make life "comfortable, confident and secure" for ordinary Russians.

Medvedev also praised Mr Putin. It is expected that Medvedev will name Putin as Russia's new prime minister and head of the government. "I would like to thank Vladimir Putin for his personal support, which I have felt constantly," he said. The Kremlin ceremony left little doubt that Putin and Medvedev will probably run Russia together ? with Putin still having considerable influence, especially behind the scenes, from his new prime ministerial office in Russia's White House.

Putin arrived at the Kremlin palace first. He strolled down a long red carpet in front of 2,400 dignitaries and diplomats. Medvedev arrived next ? a diminutive figure who, as he entered the Kremlin's vast gold Andreyevsky Hall, nervously stared at his feet. Afterwards both men stood together side by side in the Kremlin's cold, windy palace courtyard as a 31-gun salute was heard across Moscow. Aged just 42, and the youngest Russian leader for more than a hundred years, Medvedev now faces a series of problems ? both at home and abroad.

Early challenges for the new president include dealing with Russia's rising inflation ? which currently stands at 12% or more. He also has to deal with growing dissatisfaction at rising food and utility prices and the continuing population crisis. Medvedev also has several foreign policy problems in his in-tray. He has to decide what to do about the breakaway region of Abkhazia, where Russia is involved in a military stand-off with Georgia, and negotiate a new co-operation and partnership agreement with the European Union.

Medvevev has announced that his first foreign trip will be to China and Kazakhstan. But one of his early tasks will be to try to establish good relations with the next president of the United States - and improve Moscow's problematic relationship with Washington.

Some experts say that Medvedev's biggest challenge is to prevent the Kremlin's powerful military intelligence group from moving against him. Unlike Putin, Medvedev ? a former St Petersburg lawyer ? was never in the KGB, whose ex-members dominate the top levels of Russia's government and bureaucracy. "He has got enough problems to make his hair go grey," Sam Greene, an expert at the Moscow Carnegie Centre, said today. When Greene was asked who Russia's real leader would be, he said: "We have to assume the current situation will continue, so Putin will be the person that everyone calls. This government is based on flexibility and informal power relations. I've got no reason to think this is going to change in the future. The thing that made Putin different from Boris Yeltsin is his ability to mediate between different factions within the ruling class. This isn't something that's written in the constitution, and it can't easily be passed to Medvedev," he said.

Political analysts cannot agree whether Putin is planning to return as president in 2012, or intends to disappear gradually from politics. Under Russia's constitution, Putin, who took over from Boris Yeltsin in 2000, was forced to step down as president. But there is nothing to stop him returning after a four-year break. Today Putin said that he had followed the law - even though many powerful people in the government wanted him to change the law and continue as president. "I said I would work openly and honestly, to faithfully serve the people and the state. And I did not break my promise," he said in a short speech.

Meanwhile, Medvedev's promise to turn Russia into a law-based society is an interesting one. Yesterday, the authorities banned an anti-Kremlin opposition rally in Moscow by supporters of The Other Russia movement, even though the constitution guarantees people's right to gather. One man was arrested and pushed into a police van after trying to wave a banner.

"Our pensions are now 40 times less than what MPs earn. We have to survive on 4,000 roubles (GBP88) a month," Zoya Vasilyevna, a 77-year-old retired teacher, complained at the rally. "It was my generation who defended this country in the war, but now these people have stolen all the resources. Putin only likes billionaires. He's not interested in us," she said.

