It is seen as a sign of civilized eating, one which distinguishes well-fed French workers from the English who eat sandwiches at their desks. But France's tradition of the three-course restaurant lunch is in danger of disappearing for ever as a result of the economic crisis. Around 3,000 traditional French restaurants, cafes and bars went bust in the first three months of 2008 and trade unions are predicting that more will close as people worry about making ends meet. The number of French restaurants going bankrupt rose by 25% from last year, and the number of cafes forced to close rose by 56%.

Le Figaro's well-known restaurant critic, Francois Simon, said yesterday that the unwillingness of French consumers to spend money had changed national eating habits and was pushing restaurant owners towards bankruptcy. Diners were now skipping the traditional aperitif, avoiding starters, drinking tap water, not having wine or coffee and ? at most ? sharing a pudding.

Even the city's smartest restaurants were getting impatient with smaller orders. In one restaurant near Paris' Gare de Lyon, he reported, two couples were asked to leave by an angry restaurant owner because they would not order starters. The restaurant chain Hippopotamus was now offering discounts to regular customers and special-offer hamburgers, which had become more popular than French steak dishes. Office workers were increasingly buying take-away baguettes and supermarket lunches.

Making ends meet with low salaries and rising food prices has become a national obsession as problems in the French economy continue. Regular TV reports describe the desperation of people forced to eat cheap tinned vegetables or look through bins at markets for food. The restaurant sector has experienced the third highest number of bankruptcies in France this year, after the construction and building trades, according to the credit insurance group Euler Hermes SFAC.

The time French people spend on eating meals in restaurants has already gone down: in 1975, a lunch out would take an average of one and a half hours. By 2005, it had fallen to 32 minutes. Daniele Deleval, vice president of the UMIH restaurant and hotel union, said: "We're very worried. Since the start of the year, the number of restaurant customers has dropped, on average, 20% and we're seeing no signs of improvement."

Jean Guillaume, owner of Le Bouquet brasserie on Boulevard Haussmann in Paris' smart 8th district, said: "Lunch customers used to order a main course, dessert, coffee and a bottle of wine. Now they're just having a main course with tap water, and giving up the rest. Of 75 customers in this lunchtime, none had a bottle of wine ... It's the end of a tradition of lunching out and it looks like figures will stay this low for two to three years." The nearby bakery, however, was busy selling take-away baguettes, with queues down the street at midday.

Restaurant and bar owners are still suffering from a poor summer with fewer international tourists visiting Paris, especially Americans and Japanese. And in Toulouse, cafe owners complained that customers would try to make one drink last as long as possible. Even in French holiday destinations, like Arcachon in the west or the Cote d'Azur in the south, restaurant owners said business was down by at least 10%.