The Sahara desert could provide a carbon-free, nuclear-free electrical future for the whole of Europe, if not the world. We are not talking about the enormous oil and gas deposits in Algeria and Libya, or uranium for nuclear plants, but something much simpler - the sun. Every year the sun's rays provide the equivalent of 1.5m barrels of oil of energy for every square kilometre. Most people think of solar power as a few panels on the roof of a house producing hot water or a bit of electricity. But according to two reports prepared for the German government, Europe, the Middle East and North Africa should be building vast solar farms in the deserts of North Africa. The technology is simple. It is more like using a magnifying glass to burn a hole in a piece of paper than any space age technology.
 
Two German scientists, Dr Gerhard Knies and Dr Franz Trieb, calculate that covering just 0.5% of the world's hot deserts with a technology called concentrated solar power (CSP) would meet the energy needs of the entire world. Apart from electricity, CSP would also provide desalinated water for desert regions and air-conditioning for nearby cities. The scientists say that Europe should build a new high-voltage direct current electricity grid to allow the easy transport of electricity from different sources. Britain could provide wind power, Norway hydroelectric power, and central Europe biomass and geo-thermal power. Together the region could provide all its electricity needs by 2050 with no nuclear power and almost no fossil fuels. This would also reduce carbon dioxide emissions from electricity production by 70%. 

There are different forms of CSP, but they all use mirrors to concentrate the sun's rays on a pipe or vessel containing some sort of gas or liquid that heats up to about 400?C and is used to drive steam turbines. The large mirrors also create shaded areas that can be used for horticulture and which are irrigated by desalinated water generated by the plants. Cold water produced for air conditioning means there are three benefits. "CSP energy has three separate uses and this maximises its overall energy efficiency" says Dr Knies. 

This form of solar power is also attractive because the hot liquid can be stored in large containers, which can keep the turbines running after the sun has gone down. The cost of obtaining energy from CSP is equivalent to about $50 per barrel of oil. That cost will probably fall to about $20. It is about half the cost of using solar energy panels that people have on their roofs. So CSP is cheaper than oil, which currently costs about $60 a barrel. 

Dr Knies says CSP is not yet as cheap as natural gas for producing electricity alone. But if you add desalination and air conditioning, CSP is cheaper than gas, and does not produce carbon emissions. It is cheap to buy land in the desert and there is about three times as much sunlight in hot deserts as in northern Europe. This is why the reports recommend that the countries of Europe, the Middle East and Africa work together to construct a high-voltage direct current (HVDC) grid to share carbon-free energy. Most electricity grids in Europe use alternating current (AC) but this is not suitable for long-distance transport of electricity because too much electricity is lost during transportation. 

Dr Trieb, of the German Air and Space Agency, says that DC cables only lose about 3% per 1,000 kilometres. "It is both possible and cost-effective to transport solar electricity over long distances, despite what many people think." The two reports make it clear that an HVDC grid around Europe and North Africa could provide enough electricity by 2050 to make it possible to phase out nuclear power and sharply reduce the use of fossil fuels. A group of scientists has been formed across the region called the Trans-Mediterranean Renewable Energy Cooperation (Trec) but governments do not yet seem interested in the idea. 

Neil Crumpton of Friends of the Earth, said: "Most major politicians, particularly Tony Blair and George Bush, seem to have little or no awareness of the potential of CSP and they don't see how it could be used to help build global energy and climate security." The Trec scientists hope the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, will try to get an agreement on a European DC grid and the start of a CSP programme. The outlook is not optimistic. Last week more than 30 countries agreed to spend $13.5bn on a new nuclear reactor in France that critics say will not produce any electricity for 50 years, if at all.

Mr Crumpton continued: "Nuclear power provides just 3.1% of global energy supply and would be unlikely to be able to provide more. Yet CSP could supply 30% or 300% of the world's future energy needs much more simply, safely and cost-effectively. We need to invest in CSP in hot deserts, not uranium mines or oil wells."
