The Galapagos Islands lie in the Pacific Ocean almost 1,000 km west of the coast of Ecuador. As a result of their geographical isolation, the islands have unique forms of wildlife and do not have wildlife found in other parts of the world. Rats, for example. Now a rat has been found on the island of Santa Fe, causing concern and alarm among the conservationists who are trying to prevent foreign wildlife reaching the islands.

It is alleged that the rat arrived on the MV Discovery, a giant British cruise liner that visited the islands in April. Today, the ship is due to return to the Galapagos. There are 460 paying passengers on the ship. It will be met with protests and a campaign to protect the islands from such mass tourism.

Voyages of Discovery, the company that owns the ship, promises visitors to the islands: "The enigmas, secrets and charms of this spectacular and rich landscape are, like a dream, an adventure just waiting to be discovered." But the ship's arrival is a nightmare for environmental campaigners. Conservationists on the Galapagos have also found swarms of foreign insects on the islands since the ship's last visit and are worried that when it returns it could introduce more foreign species that might do further damage to the sensitive ecosystems. 

The Discovery, the first large cruise ship to have visited the islands, is scheduled to return again in April and then twice a year after that. The islands belong to Ecuador and the Ecuadorian government has granted permits that could mean that one cruise ship stops there every month. 

Leonor Stjepic, director of the Galapagos Conservation Trust, warned that such an increase in visitor numbers would make it very difficult for conservationists to keep out pests and disease. "The more people that come, the greater the risk of foreign species. It is almost impossible to search a boat that size thoroughly. These large numbers mean it's much easier for something to slip through our controls. And if we can't protect the Galapagos then what does it say about the other natural spaces in the world? 

"The Galapagos are not suitable for this kind of mass tourism. We're not being elitist: the islands simply do not have the infrastructure for that number of people. We're not anti-tourism, but it's got to be high-value, low-volume tourism." Before the visit of the Discovery, almost all visitors to the islands flew direct from the mainland. "This cruise ship has travelled all the way down the coast of South America and could bring all sorts of things with it," Ms Stjepic said. 

As well as the rat, and the insects, environmentalists say the Discovery's last visit left the islands covered in litter, dropped by wealthy tourists who "have no idea where they are or the impact their visit may have". Someone even wrote graffiti at the visitor centre and one passenger reportedly asked where the local Starbucks was. 

The study of the impact of the liner's first visit was carried out by the local Charles Darwin Foundation and the Galapagos National Park Service. As well as the foreign wildlife, it found that sales for local businesses increased by 5%, a third of what was expected. There were too many visitors for the local infrastructure, they said, and local tour operators, who take visitors around the different islands, had to land large boats on fragile beaches because elderly cruise passengers were unable to get in and out of rubber dinghies.

However, David Yellow, managing director of Voyages of Discovery, said the campaigners were "speaking from ignorance". He said the firm operated under strict restrictions and carried out a detailed environmental impact study before it received its licence to operate in the Galapagos. "We are experienced at operating in environmentally sensitive areas and we know what to do. All our people [passengers] are given a lecture before they go ashore and we know they obey the instructions." The Discovery anchored at the island of San Cristobal during its stay, he said, at least 25 miles from Santa Fe where the rat was found.
 
Mr Yellow said there was no proof that the graffiti and litter were left by Discovery tourists. "Local people also make litter. They are not as sensitive to the environment as the people we take there. There are local people who smoke a cigarette and throw it into the street." Attracted by the unique wildlife and mystique, the number of visitors to the islands each year has increased from about 40,000 in the late 1980s to more than 100,000 now.
