Last July, Lisa Nowak travelled 5.3 million miles, taking 12 days, 18 hours, 37 minutes and 54 seconds, to win her position in one of the world's most select clubs: travellers in space. Last Monday, she went about 950 miles in 14 hours to lose it.

Yesterday, in the strangest incident ever involving a professional NASA astronaut, Mrs Nowak was charged with attempted first-degree murder, attempted kidnapping and battery. Apparently, the married mother of three, separated from her husband, was involved in a love triangle with a fellow male astronaut and a female air force captain whom she suspected of having a relationship with him.

A Florida judge ruled last night that Mrs Nowak could be fitted with a tracking device and released from custody if she could come up with $25,000 (GBP13,000) bail and did not contact her alleged victim.

The group to which 43-year-old Mrs Nowak belongs is extremely 'select': she is one of only 97 astronauts currently trained and ready to fly, 20 of them women. NASA has only chosen a total of 321 astronauts since the US agency started its space programme in 1959.

All of which makes her behaviour in the early hours of Monday so surprising. NASA had very carefully selected and trained her for 10 years to cope with extreme stress before her flight in the Discovery space shuttle in July. But this Monday, she set off on her own private mission.
 
Mrs Nowak admitted to Orlando police that she started her 950-mile drive from Houston, Texas, to Orlando on Sunday, bringing a carbon-dioxide powered pellet gun, a folding knife with a four-inch blade, pepper spray, a steel hammer and $600 in cash. She also had several large black bin liners, six latex gloves and rubber tubing, as well as a wig and two hooded trench coats for disguise. 

She also wore a nappy on the journey, so that she wouldn't have to stop very often - a professional trick, as astronauts wear nappies during take off and landing. 

She explained that she had discovered that Colleen Shipman, a US air force captain, was flying in from Houston to Orlando that night. Mrs Nowak wanted to be there to "scare her" into talking about her relationship with the man at the centre of the love triangle. 

He is Bill Oefelein, 41, from Alaska, who did astronaut training with Mrs Nowak. Like her, he first went into space last year, also on Discovery, although they have never flown together. Police found evidence of Mrs Nowak's feelings for Mr Oefelein in a letter in her car, together with emails between him and Ms Shipman, and directions to Ms Shipman's house. In her statement, Mrs Nowak said she had "more than a working relationship, but less than a romantic relationship" with him.
 
Ms Shipman allegedly saw Mrs Nowak, whom she had never met before, wearing a hooded trench coat, dark glasses and the wig, following her on a bus from the airport lounge to the car park. Afraid, she hurried to her car. She could hear running footsteps behind her and as she slammed the door Mrs Nowak hit the window and tried to pull the door open. 

"Can you help me, please? My boyfriend was supposed to pick me up and he is not here," Mrs Nowak apparently begged. When Ms Shipman said she could not help, the astronaut started to cry. Ms Shipman wound down her window a couple of inches, at which Mrs Nowak let off the pepper spray. Ms Shipman drove off, her eyes burning, and raised the alarm. She alleges the astronaut had been stalking her for about two months. 

Sergeant Barb Jones of Orlando police said last night that Mrs Nowak clearly intended to do "serious bodily injury or death." Her behaviour and later appearance in court has amazed people in the closed world of space exploration. Tariq Malik, a science reporter who interviewed Mrs Nowak just before she went into space, said astronauts were carefully chosen and trained so that surprises did not happen. 

"They have to fly in very cramped spaces and under intense stress, so they have to be able to cope," he said.
Mrs Nowak had an important technical job in the July flight, in charge of a robotic arm for repairing the international space station when the shuttle joined it in space. 

Before the mission, she said she had first become interested in space at the age of five when she watched the moon landing on television, and on visits to the Air and Space Museum in Washington. 

Her official photograph, taken before the flight, shows her in full astronaut's suit, smiling broadly. Yesterday, TV screens showed a picture with a difference: as Mrs Nowak was booked into jail, she looked absolutely terrible. NASA has suspended her for 30 days and removed her from all shuttle mission activities.
