The northern lights (also known as aurora borealis) are a unique natural phenomenon, caused as the Earth's atmosphere is hit by energy particles from magnetic storms in space. For scientists, however, the lights also represent one of the oldest mysteries in space physics: how and where in space do the displays of light begin? And how can they be predicted?

Today, NASA will launch five identical spacecraft from Cape Canaveral in Florida, in an attempt to answer the question. By measuring how the magnetic field around the Earth changes in real time, the Themis project will allow scientists to better predict the weather in space that lies behind the northern lights. This information is important for keeping communications satellites safe as they orbit the Earth and will also be vital for humans as they travel in space. 

The northern lights are a visual representation of turbulence in the Earth's magnetic field. The sun continually sends energy towards our planet, some of which is stored by the Earth's magnetic field at heights of 10,000 km above the surface. The field creates a protective shield for the Earth in space, called the magnetosphere, which protects our planet from much of the deadly radiation coming from the sun. But every now and then, the field releases the energy it has stored and sends showers of energetic electrons towards the upper atmosphere. When these electrons come into contact with air, the energy released causes a characteristic glow.

The colours represent the composition of the air at that height. Green and red are the oxygen glowing and violet is nitrogen. Most of the time, the northern lights are a steady band stretching from east to west but every few hours the energy released by the magnetic field intensifies into a substorm. 

"It becomes interesting when a substorm goes off - it brightens and then, within 30 seconds, it starts rushing towards the north. It covers the entire sky and breaks up into little pieces," said Vassilis Angelopoulos, principal investigator on the Themis project. "It's a magnificent phenomenon to watch." The sequence of events that leads to a substorm is unknown. "The problem so far is that we cannot find the source of the process using just one satellite," said Professor Angelopoulos.
 
The five Themis satellites will orbit the Earth in such a way that they line up along the sun-Earth line every four days and track the flow of energy from one to the other. Possible sources for the substorms have different locations in space, so placing the Themis spacecraft in various locations in the Earth's magnetic field will help find the source. They will be able to record that a particular source of energy happened between two particular spacecraft at a particular time. 

More than 20 ground stations across the US will track the Themis satellites, to give precise locations for the magnetic substorms that are observed. Themis will also work with the European Cluster project which uses four satellites to measure the Earth's magnetic field. 

"In the same way that meteorologists study tornadoes in order to understand the large thunderstorms, we study substorms to get better insight into large space storms," said Professor Angelopoulos. Predicting these storms is important for scientists to describe the environment around the Earth and ensure spacecraft and astronauts can operate safely, as the particles created in the storms can damage electronic circuits. The radiation can also knock out power grids on the Earth's surface. 

Modern warnings of space storms are unreliable. "It's like what weather forecasting may have been a century ago. Over the last 50 years, it has developed quite dramatically because they understand the sequence of events much better. We are doing the same sort of thing, trying to understand that sequence and give people more accurate predictions," says UK space expert Mike Hapgood.

The Themis satellites will make their first working measurements in a year's time. They are scheduled to operate for two years. Dr Hapgood said that understanding the Earth's magnetic field will also give scientists information about other planets in the solar system that have magnetospheres: "These things also happen further out in the universe. Understanding how magnetospheres work is a universal question."
