The US armed forces are becoming pessimistic about their prospects of victory in Iraq. Many US soldiers remember what happened in Vietnam. In recent years the US army has become an effective tool for large-scale military operations overseas, but it has neverbeen the right kind of force to fight against insurgency. Guerrillas and suicide bombers are very difficult for conventional forces to deal with. 

Many years ago an American general said to me: "We went into Korea in 1950 with a very poor army, and came out of it in 1953 with a very good one. We went into Vietnam in 1964 with a fine army, and came out in 1975 with a terrible one." The US armed forces are fighting a kind of war to which they are not suited. But would military failure really be a defeat? Could America win in the end in Iraq by means in which armed forces play no part? Edward Luttwak, an American military expert, suggested that the US began to win the Vietnam War the day after its ambassador was evacuated from the roof of the Saigon embassy in April 1975. The military battle was lost -but, Luttwak argued, the US began to achieve victory culturally and economically. Vietnam may still be a communist state in theory, but in reality capitalism is everywhere. American values are taking over Vietnam just as they have taken over other nations with a desire to be wealthy. 

Luttwak describes what is happening as the US acquiring a "virtual empire", built on dominance. This is a powerful argument, certainly in the eyes of Osama bin Laden, who is trying to mobilise the Muslim world to resist American empire-building. The terrorists of Al-Qaida are trying to fight against a cultural invasion that is more effective than weapons of war. Bill Gates and Steven Spielberg represent influences which are much harder to fight against than a regular army. 

Luttwak's argument is that, while the US might have to leave Iraq without achieving a military victory, American values will win the war in the end. Will Baghdad follow Vietnam and sell its soul to the US, in a way which Bin Laden would find disgusting? I am not arguing that military power has no purpose. But recent history suggests that America is less skilful in using military power to fulfil its national purposes than in using economic and cultural power. 

Last spring in a refugee camp in Gaza, I asked a group of children what they enjoyed watching on television. Without hesitation they all said: "Rambo!" It is difficult to think of a less appropriate role model. What seemed significant, however, was not the character of Rambo, but where Rambo came from. Their parents had grown up to mistrust and hate America. But Hollywood has a much greater power than the power of President Bush and the Pentagon. Young Palestinians may hate the US, but they cannot avoid its culture. 

Even if the insurgents in Iraq are successful in forcing the US to leave the country, they have much less chance of winning a war against Tom Hanks, Julia Roberts and so on, because they can easily enter Iraqi homes now that satellite TV is available almost everywhere in the country. 

Powerful armies might become less relevant to the movement of societies in the 21st century than cultural forces. 

Unfortunately, in the poorest and least educated societies on earth, military force will continue to decide who is in power. But wherever people are exposed to external cultural influences, and, in fairness to George Bush, "wherever they are given freedom to receive such influences", soldiers will have a less important role to play. 

The US armed forces might not win the war in Iraq. But in the long term, perhaps Microsoft and DreamWorks will succeed where George Bush and his military forces have failed. 