At Milan, Juventus and Real Madrid the players called Fabio Capello 'Mister', the name given to generations of managers in Italy and Spain by the many British football coaches around the world. In England, however, he will have another title. The players can call him 'Boss', Capello declared.

The England football squad will have to do exactly what the Italian says. And that means no wasting time with computer games, no strolling down to breakfast whenever they feel like it, and absolutely no golf before international football matches.

"After the match they can play all the golf they like," Capello said with a grim smile during a press conference, when he explained the need for strict rules.
"We are only together for a short time," he said, "and in that time you need to create a way of working. To do that you need to set some rules. Eating together and getting up from the table at the same time and being punctual ? these things are about respect for other people and for each other. We don't have a long time to create a group mentality. It's important to spend time together. 

"Compared to football clubs, we don't have many days together. Therefore we need strict rules. If we follow those rules, we'll create a group and a specific winning mentality, which is what I want."

"People make mistakes but, if they want to be part of this group, they will follow the rules. If someone doesn't, then we will analyse why the rules were broken and take the appropriate course of action."

At the press conference, headphones were provided for journalists who needed a simultaneous translation from the manager's native tongue. "I will speak English with you when I am sure that I know all the terms and all the right words," he said. "You are good at twisting things, so I want to be very careful. But with the players I can explain and communicate in English and I'm happy about that."

Capello's objective is to create a unified team in time for the first World Cup qualifying game against Andorra in September. In the meantime, he will be studying videos of each friendly match and passing on his comments to the players.

"We've worked very hard on tactics for the last few days in order to create a group mentality and, more importantly, a different way of moving on the pitch," he said. "I've seen some English clubs move on the pitch in the way I want my team to move. So for some it won't be anything new. Others who aren't used to moving this way will have to learn."

Psychologically, his main task will be to restore the players' self-confidence which was so badly damaged when the England team failed to qualify for Euro 2008. But that, as he pointed out, is not an overnight job.

"I want the team to regain their winning mentality by being confident in their own resources and by playing bravely. I believe we need to leave the past behind. We need a positive mind-set and to look ahead. But we can't perform miracles. We've only just started our work. Give us time to show what we can do."

So, after a month in England, what was his view of England's players? "I think players are the same everywhere," he concluded. "My first impressions of these players are very good. They're very attentive and eager to impress. With this spirit and mentality I believe we will be able to do very well."

