In an open letter to the star they said: "After diamonds were found on our land we were evicted ... Those diamonds are a curse for us. We hope you will use your film to let people know that we too are victims of diamonds and we just want to go home."

Some people in the diamond industry have accused Hollywood of trivialising the truth about African diamonds. Eli Izhakoff, chairman of the World Diamond Council, said: "This movie is about something that happened years ago, something that has already been put right." The industry has started a website to counter any negative publicity from the film. Diamondfacts.org talks about the benefits the industry has brought to its workers and also uses Nelson Mandela, who describes the diamond industry as "vital" to southern Africa's economy. 

In Botswana 25% of jobs are directly or indirectly linked to diamonds, while in Namibia the diamond trade is the second-biggest employer after the government, the industry says. The Bushmen are not the only African voices in the debate. Patrick Mazimhaka, a Rwandan diplomat who is now deputy chairman of the African Union, wrote in a US newspaper recently saying that highlighting the negative role of diamonds in civil wars "misses the fact that a lot of good can be done with money earned from natural resources. With good management and careful leadership ... natural resources have been a great force for good in Africa." 

The purpose of the diamond trade's campaign is to protect a market worth $2.3bn in Britain last year. Diamond retailers make a fifth of their sales at Christmas, when the film is due for its US release. It is expected to come out in Britain in the New Year. "We don't see [the film] as damaging so long as the historical perspective is clear," Izhakoff said. The industry says that conflict diamonds now make up less than 1% of all diamonds sold, compared with 4% in the late 1990s, the period in which the film is set. The Kimberley Process, a scheme that requires governments to track rough diamonds from mines to the polished stage, has almost eliminated conflict diamonds, the industry says. 

"This system is not perfect, but we are trying very hard to make it perfect," Izhakoff said. "We don't want a single conflict diamond on the market." But not everyone agrees that the problem has been solved. After peace agreements ended several African civil wars, the main source of conflict diamonds is Ivory Coast, where rebels control some mining areas. According to the pressure group Global Witness, diamonds smuggled out of Ivory Coast into Mali are being sold on to international dealers. Congo-Brazzaville has been prohibited from diamond trading because many people believe it is a centre of diamond smuggling, and next door in the Democratic Republic of Congo, there is still occasional fighting for control of diamond mines and other minerals even though the civil war is over. Susie Sanders, Global Witness campaigner, said: "We want stronger internal controls to make sure that conflict diamonds can't be smuggled into countries that are [in the] Kimberley Process and exported. There is lots of smuggling. The control systems just aren't strong enough." 

Jewellers in London's Hatton Garden diamond district said they had been offered west African diamonds by smugglers. One jeweller said: "The only thing we can do is make sure they're non-conflict through our sources. We don't buy from Angola or anywhere that it can be turned into arms. "Sierra Leone is one of the countries we don't touch. We get people coming in from there [saying]: 'Do you buy rough diamonds?'. We say: 'Where are they from?' - [they say] 'Sierra Leone', and we say 'Get out'. We're doing everything we can to make sure we don't end up providing money that is used to buy weapons." In fact, both Sierra Leone and Angola have peace agreements now and can trade in diamonds again but conflict diamonds from Ivory Coast are still illegal. 

There is a fear that the film will stop people buying all African diamonds, something both the industry and the campaigners want to avoid. "It would be terrible if the film meant that people saw Sierra Leone as a pariah," said Sanders. "Quite a few African countries have weak control systems. It's [the case] in West Africa and the Congo. "What we really hope doesn't happen is that people say 'I'm not going to buy African diamonds'. What we want to do is protect the legitimate diamond trade from Africa."