The leader of the Northern Ireland Democratic Unionist Party, Ian Paisley, and the leader of the republican Sinn Fein party, Gerry Adams, sat side by side at a meeting for the first time yesterday. At the end of the meeting they announced they had reached an agreement to share power from May 8 in a new Northern Ireland government. The two men have been arch-enemies for many years and the televised statement at the end of their meeting in Stormont, the Northern Ireland parliament building, will be seen by many people as a watershed in the politics of the province.

The private meeting, which lasted just over an hour, was the first time the two parties had held direct talks. It enabled both sides to issue statements promising political cooperation and the start of a new and peaceful era. The agreement between the unionist firebrand and the leader of a militant republican movement that once killed opponents was welcomed in London and Dublin as an important stage in a peace process that has lasted more than 10 years. Emergency laws will be introduced in the British parliament today to enable a smooth transition. The new Northern Ireland government should be operating before Tony Blair quits as UK prime minister.
 
The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the DUP's reluctance to join a power-sharing government before the deadline of midnight yesterday. DUP politicians said they needed more time to make sure that Sinn Fein would implement its promise to support the Northern Ireland police force. The postponement to May 8 will also help DUP members to adjust to the new situation. 

The atmosphere was described as "cordial" and "constructive". The Sinn Fein leader wore an Easter lily badge, to commemorate those who died in the 1916 uprising. There was no handshake. 

"In the past," Mr Paisley said, "the British government has set arbitrary deadlines but now ... we as a party have agreed the timing, setting up and working of the institutions. We have agreed with Sinn Fein that this date will be Tuesday May 8 ... After a long and difficult time in the province I believe that the future holds enormous opportunities ... We are doing this for all the people of Northern Ireland. We must not allow our justified loathing of the horrors and tragedies of the past to stop us from creating a better and more stable future. But when we look to that future we must never forget those people who have suffered during the dark period from which we are, please God, emerging." 

Mr Adams welcomed the DUP's commitment: "While it is disappointing that we have not restored all the parliamentary institutions today, I believe the agreement reached between Sinn Fein and the DUP ... marks the beginning of a new era of politics on this island ... The relationships between the people of this island have been damaged by centuries of discord, conflict, hurt and tragedy ... We have all come a very long way in the process of peace making and national reconciliation. We are very conscious of the many people who have suffered. We owe it to them to build the best future possible. It is a time for generosity, a time to think of the common good and of the future of all our people."
 
Both parties will go together to the British government in the coming weeks to ask for more money for Northern Ireland. Mr Paisley said both parties would do some preparatory work before May 8 to ensure everything was ready. To underline the importance of the occasion, the DUP leader left the meeting with a broad smile and shouted to waiting journalists: "Do you have eyes in your head?"
 
In London Tony Blair said: "In a sense, everything that we've done over the last 10 years has been a preparation for this moment. This won't stop republicans or nationalists being any less republican or nationalist, or make unionists any less unionist. But what it does mean is that people can come together, respect each other's point of view, and share power, making sure politics is only expressed by peaceful and democratic means."
