South Korean and American scientists have cloned human embryos and successfully extracted stem cells from one of them. The research opens the way for once-undreamed of treatments for long-term diseases such as diabetes, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. It also reignites the debate about human cloning. The team used 242 eggs from 16 women to clone 30 blastocysts - the tiny ball of cells that become an embryo. Stem cells are the agents that turn a single fertilised egg into up to 10 trillion cells in just nine months' gestation. 

Scientists around the world have cloned sheep, mice, rats, rabbits, horses, and even a mule. But despite dramatic yet unsupported claims from European fertility clinics, primates and humans were thought to be almost impossible to clone. 

The Korean and US scientists sucked the original DNA out of the egg, and substituted it with chromosomes from an adult cell. Then they "tricked" the egg into thinking it had been fertilised. "Nobody has cloned a human here," said Donald Kennedy, a biologist and editor in chief of Science. 

Dr Kennedy hoped that it might prompt American politicians to think again about the ban on using government money for such research. It could offer the possibility that people with degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's could be given tissue transplants with their own genetic "signature". 

But the White House responded to the news of the breakthrough with a reminder that President George Bush is opposed to stem cell research. "The age of human cloning has apparently arrived: today cloned blastocysts for research, tomorrow cloned blastocysts for baby-making," said Leon Kass, chairman of the president's council on bioethics. Last week's announcement was the culmination of years of research into the potential benefits of therapeutic cloning. But for those benefits to be realised, researchers must now work out how to turn the cells into replacement human tissue needed to treat disease. 

In the long term, some scientists believe it could be possible to grow entire organs. Linda Kelly of the Parkinson's Disease Society in the UK said: "This announcement is clearly a milestone in medical research." But the pressure group Human Genetics Alert warned that researchers had given a big boost to those who want to make cloned babies. Such fears arise because the initial steps in therapeutic cloning and reproductive cloning are identical. 