For years the fat man with a red suit and a large white beard has been surprising strangers with his generosity. But now Santa has been forced to retire and stay at home - but he has revealed his true identity first.

Over the last 26 years, Larry Stewart, a 58-year-old businessman from Kansas City, has given $1.3m to strangers he met in the street. He started by giving $5 and $10 bills to people who looked unhappy or unlucky. As he became richer - he has made millions with a cable television and long-distance telephone service - the gifts rose to $100 bills. 

But Mr Stewart has always kept his identity secret. People began to call him Secret Santa. This spring, however, he was diagnosed with cancer of the oesophagus. The $16,000 monthly cost of the chemotherapy is not covered by his health insurance policy, and Mr Stewart is now too weak to continue. 

So he has decided to reveal his identity. Mr Stewart hopes that he might inspire someone else to take over his Santa duties. 

Mr Stewart has a team of little helpers, who in recent years have given out $100,000 travelling between Chicago and Kansas City. He also has four deputy Santas who this year will give out $65,000. 

Over the years Stewart has been in news reports and appeared - in full costume - on Oprah Winfrey's television show. "You really are Santa," she told him. There is a Secret Santa website and even a book, Santa's Secret: A Story of Hope, written by a local journalist. 

Stewart has experience of poverty. In the early 1970s he was poor and jobless and he had to live in his car, a yellow Datsun 510. One day he went to a church to ask for help. They told him the person who could help wasn't there and he should return the following day. 

"As I turned around, I knew I would never do that again," Mr Stewart told Associated Press. 

By the late 1970s Stewart had a job and some money, but he was still unlucky. In 1979 he was fired from his job in the week before Christmas. But when he saw a shivering, waitress at a drive-in restaurant, he realised that were others worse off than him. 

"It was cold and this waitress didn't have on a very big jacket, and I thought to myself, 'I think I got it bad. She's out there in this cold making nickels and dimes'," he said. 
He gave her a $20 bill. ]

"And then she began to cry. She said, 'Sir, you have no idea what this means to me'."

Stewart went to the bank, withdrew $200 and drove around Kansas looking for people to give it to. The Secret Santa story was born.


