It's four o'clock in the afternoon and a hundreds of employees are leaving the headquarters of Ariana, Afghanistan's national airline. In the boardroom, one man stays behind. Dr Muhammad Atash, a man with a kind but worried face, sits in his chair and rubs his eyes. Ariana faces a number of "difficulties", he explains. "Employees steal from the company. They give jobs to members of their family. There's a lot of bureaucracy. There aren't many qualified staff and a lot of people prefer not to do any work." But then he pauses. "I believe we are starting to make progress." 

Ariana is different from most other airlines for many reasons, all of them bad. Its history is terrible. During Afghanistan's quarter of a century of war, Ariana planes were shut down, shot down or hijacked. No-one chooses to fly Ariana today. It has a disastrous safety record and this means it cannot fly to most European and American airports. It is nicknamed "Scaryana". UN officials and foreign diplomats are not allowed to take Ariana flights. And most of the 1,700 staff are, according to Atash, either extremely incompetent or corrupt. 

Is Ariana the world's worst airline? Perhaps not. There are many bad airlines in the developing world. "Ariana is no worse than many others," says David Learmount at Flight International magazine. "If a country has no safety culture, neither does its airline." But Ariana has one advantageover other disaster airlines . it has a rescue plan. Atash, a straight-talking Afghan-American emigre, returned three years ago from the USA where he ran a business. He was given the job of manager at Ariana in June. 

It is not a glamorous job. Atash is paid just $100 a month and uses his own mobile phone. But he has a can-do attitude and plans to get rid of hundreds of incompetent staff. It is a difficult task but he is not alone. In comes Hanns Marienfeld, the leader of a six-strong team from Lufthansa hired to help with the rescue plan. He describes the state of Ariana one year ago: "It was not up to international standards," he says. "It had no flight schedule. Customers had to pay a bribe to get a ticket, a second bribe to get a boarding pass and sometimes a third to get their seat in business class. We flew here or there, whenever the pilots felt like it." Initial safety standards were not good. In 2003 and 2004, Ariana's fleet of six planes suffered six major engine failures. "In Germany, our pilots only see that sort of thing in a flight simulator. In Ariana we do it in real life," says Marienfeld. 

The early years were very different. Ariana was founded in 1955 and quickly gained a reputation as a small but proud regional carrier. It flew hippies and adventurers from London, Paris and Frankfurt and brought honeymooning couples from neighbouring Pakistan. But in 1973, King Zahir Shah was overthrown and five years later a civil war began. The visitors vanished and Ariana, like the rest of Afghanistan, suffered very badly. 

During the 10-year Soviet occupation, when the roads were too dangerous, Ariana became the safest way to travel. But the sense of security was relative. The mujahideen fighters who were fighting the Soviet forces were armed with American anti-aircraft missiles. So Ariana pilots had to learn how to avoid the missiles while taking off and landing. Some staff could take no more. On a flight to Kandahar in 1989, a fight broke out between the pilot and the co-pilot. The pilot wanted to fly the plane to Iran. The co-pilot did not want to go. As they fought for the controls, the plane fell out of the sky, crashing into the desert near the Iranian border. All six people on board died. 

After the Soviet departure the airline went from bad to worse. When the Taliban took control of Kabul a year later, they brought their 7th century ideas to Ariana's 20th-century business. They sent the stewardesses home, banned inflight music and gave the job of director to a 26-year-old religious fanatic.  

The UN imposed an international flight ban on the airline as part of UN sanctions against the Taliban. The company's reputation for disaster got bigger as its fleet of ageing aircraft got smaller. The former prime minister died in a 1997 crash; two accidents in 1998 killed about 100 people. In 2000, a flight from Kabul to Mazar-i-Sharif was hijacked to Stansted airport in the UK. 

In 2001, the US led an international invasion of Afghanistan. This should have saved Ariana but instead it almost destroyed the company. US planes bombed the Ariana fleet, destroying six of its eight planes. The Taliban took $500,000 in company cash and ran. 

Now a process of change has begun. The number of flights has increased from 10 to 15 a week. Ariana management says 85% of flights are on time. Ariana made a modest $1m profit last year. At Kabul airport the mechanics have new tools and new pilots are being trained. The old Kabul office will close soon and a modern sales centre, complete with young, enthusiastic staff and computerised booking, will open soon. 

Meanwhile Atash plans to ask half his 1,700 staff to stay at home but continue their pay. "We are building the system with completely new people. We cannot mix them with the corrupt old ones," says Atash. Success is not guaranteed, however, and there is now a battle for control of the company. "We're going to fight all the way," Atash promises. "Because the other option is to sit here and do nothing. And that's not an option -either for Ariana or for Afghanistan." 