The reality TV show Celebrity Big Brother is already in its fifth year. The number of viewers has been falling but now a controversy over the alleged racism of some of the participants in this year's show has led to demonstrations on Indian streets, shock and anger in Downing Street, condemnation from the Chancellor of the Exchequer on a state visit to India and a police investigation.

The Channel 4 show has always been controversial but has never before caused an international incident. However, as the number of complaints from angry viewers grew to 22,000, the Indian government criticised the programme and local police confirmed they would investigate allegations that three white fellow contestants had behaved in a racist way towards Bollywood star Shilpa Shetty. 

The number of complaints looked sure to rise last night as Channel 4 broadcast a furious argument between Shetty and Jade Goody, who earned millions after appearing on the non-celebrity version of the show. Speaking to another contestant, Cleo Rocos, after the argument Shetty said: "I'm representing my country. Is that what today's UK is? It's scary. It's quite a shame actually." Rocos said: "I don't think there's anything racist in it." But Shetty replied: "It is, I'm telling you." Later, glamour model Danielle Lloyd, talking to Goody, said that the Bollywood star should go back home.
 
India's Information and Broadcasting Minister appealed to Shetty to appear before the Indian High Commission in London when she came out of the house. "If there has been some racism shown against her in the show, it is not only an attack on women but also on the colour of her skin and her country," he said. 19,300 complaints were made to the UK media regulator, more than double the previous record, while a further 3,000 complaints were made direct to Channel 4. Another 20,000 people signed an online petition organised by the newspaper Eastern Eye. 

The local police said they would formally investigate 30 complaints. A spokesman said: "We are investigating allegations of racist behaviour in the Big Brother house, and will conduct an inquiry, including a review of videotapes of the programme." Channel 4 executives and the show's producers met yesterday to discuss the row, but privately they may be delighted. Tuesday night's show was watched by 4.5 million people, one million more than on Monday.
 
The controversy started after a series of incidents involving a group of contestants led by Goody, and including her boyfriend Jack Tweed, Lloyd and former pop singer Jo O'Meara. At one point Goody, after an argument with Shetty, had said: "You need elocution lessons. You need a day in the slums. Go to those people who look up to you and be real. You're a fake." 

Channel 4 released a statement saying that there had been no overt racism, and claiming that the arguments were the result of class and cultural differences. But in India, the row has united all the major political parties. Communists, Hindu nationalists and the ruling Congress party have all demanded action be taken to preserve Shetty's dignity. "[Big Brother] is holding a mirror to British society. This is not a one-off situation. We should thank Channel 4 for showing us the hidden prejudices of Britain," Mahesh Bhatt, a Bollywood director, told the Guardian.
 
Dozens of Shetty's fans protested on the streets in Patna, eastern India. In Bangalore, the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, had to answer questions from journalists about a reality show he said he had never seen. "I understand that in the UK there have already been 10,000 complaints from viewers about remarks which people rightly regard as offensive," he said. "I want Britain to be seen as a country of fairness and tolerance. I condemn anything that goes against that view." Tony Blair's spokesman later added that racism is not tolerated in any way in the UK. 

In one exchange, Goody said about Shetty: "She makes me feel sick. She makes my skin crawl," while another contestant continually referred to her as "the Indian". Later Lloyd claimed that the Bollywood star "wants to be white" and called her a "dog". After Shetty cooked a roast chicken dinner, Lloyd had said: "They eat with their hands in India, don't they. Or is that China?" She added: "You don't know where those hands have been."