If you suddenly received a lot of money, how would you spend it? And if you knew that your world was about to disappear, what would you do with the time you had got left? For the people of Tuvalu, a tiny state comprising nine islands in the South Pacific, these are crucial questions.

In 1999 Tuvalu, with its population of 11,000, was the third poorest state in the world. But suddenly something unusual happened. Tuvalu received a domain name on the internet ? the letters ".tv". A communication company from California quickly offered to buy the domain name for$40m. For the Tuvalans, with an average annual income of about$1,000, this was a huge amount of money. The islanders became very rich, or at least reacted as if they had become very rich.

At the same time the islanders received some very bad news. Due to global warming, and because the islands are only 3m above sea level, Tuvalu will probably become the first state in the world to disappear under the sea. According to scientific estimates, the islands will suffer severe floods within the next 15-20years, and by the end of the century, the islands will have disappeared from sight altogether. 

You can already see signs of the rising sea on Tuvalu. Pools of sea water appear here and there, some beaches are swallowed by the waves, and the roots of trees are rotting by the ocean. Cyclones used to be very rare but they now appear a few times every season, and the rains that come with the cyclones cause temporary floods. 

But despite these problems, the Tuvalans had their new money. They could use it to buy themselves a future. Or at least they could use it to borrow more time. Paul Lindsay, a documentary film-maker, took these questions with him all the way to Tuvalu, and came back with an incredible story. As the water rises, the Tuvalans are using the money to develop the land that is soon to disappear. They are building new houses, planning nightclubs, restaurants and hotels and new cars are driving around on new roads. The residents do not think it is strange: "Just because we are sinking, it doesn't mean we don't want to raise our standards of living," Lindsay was told by Sam Teo, Tuvalu's minister for natural resources. 

Of the $40m Tuvalu received through the internet deal, $10m was used to asphalt the islands' 19km of roads. Before 1999 there were four cars on the islands. The Tuvalans used to walk or cycle everywhere. The minister for natural resources, who was in charge of paving the roads, owns one of the two petrol stations on the main island. 

Along with the motor revolution there was a flood of imported foods and goods and soon these had unexpected consequences. Many Tuvalans now suffer from obesity, high blood pressure and diabetes. Others discovered that it was too expensive for them to keep their cars, and that anyway cars are not really necessary in a state that is just 26 sq km. There is now a huge rubbish dump in the middle of this tropical paradise, covered with abandoned cars and other waste. 

For a while the Tuvalans spent large amounts of money to raise international awareness of Tuvalu's situation. Tuvalu joined the UN, at a cost of $1.5m a year. The delegate to the UN is the prime minister's brother, and the Tuvalan delegation was especially active in promoting the Kyoto protocol to fight global warming. But while the political system argues about the best way to stop the rising waters, the sea keeps going up, and the Tuvalans keep spending their dollars. 

All Tuvalans know that they will probably not die of old age on their islands. The solution to the problem is not so simple, however. They cannot move to the nearby island of Kioa, because it has said it will not take any more immigrants. Australia doesn't want to let the Tuvalans in, and New Zealand will only take a small number each year. When the islands are finally flooded, the Tuvalan nation will probably be split up.

After the eight months he spent among the Tuvalans, Lindsay is not sentimental about white sands and turquoise waters. "There are no more paradises. Tuvalu is trying to keep its sense of social solidarity in the face of progress. Nowadays even paradise has a price".

