The two escaped prisoners made fun of their guards. Not only did they leave a handwritten note that said, "Thank you officer for the tools we needed. You're a real pal! Happy holidays." They also signed it with a smiley face. The note was a leaving card from two prisoners in a New Jersey jail who broke out of a high-security wing using just a thick metal wire and a metal wheel used to turn off water pipes. The daring breakout combined a detailed knowledge of Hollywood prison films, an ability to squeeze through small holes like Houdini, and an ability to jump off high buildings.

Police are still searching for Jose Espinosa, 20, and Otis Blunt, 32, as details emerge about how they managed to escape from Union County jail. They began by using the wire to remove the cement around a concrete block in the wall between their two cells, B310 and B311. After removing the block, Blunt managed to squeeze his 1.79-metre (5ft 9in), (11?st) body through a 20cm by 40cm hole into Espinosa's cell. From there, Espinosa, who is 1.67 metres tall (5ft 5in) and 10st 10lb, and Blunt both squeezed through a similar hole that had been opened by removing a block separating Espinosa's cell from the outside world.

Investigators found that the men had used the heavy metal wheel to break up the concrete blocks and hide the rubble in the plastic boxes they used to store their personal possessions. Then, just like in the movies, they placed posters of women in bikinis over the holes.

A local prosecutor, Ted Romankow, did not approve of the Hollywood connection. "I think this is a very serious situation," he told reporters at a press conference. "I really prefer not to compare with any movie, although I can understand why you might do that because it does look certainly very similar to some of them." Then, in a complete contradiction of his previous position, he added: "Except in The Shawshank Redemption they had a better poster on the wall."

From The Shawshank Redemption the inmates moved to Steve McQueen's The Great Escape. They filled their beds with pillows so the prison guards would think they were still asleep. When they had got out of the cell they jumped from a roof 10 metres high. No blood was found, which means they were probably not injured.

After that, all they had to do was climb an eight-metre razor-wire fence, which didn't seem to bother them either. Tracks in the snow suggest they split up and headed in opposite directions along a railway line.

It emerged that this was the second time Blunt had tried to break out using the wire method. On the first occasion a fellow prisoner told the prison authorities about his plan and he was moved to what they thought was a more secure part of the prison.

Blunt was in prison awaiting trial for robbery and shooting at a corner shop. Espinosa had already pleaded guilty to manslaughter and was awaiting sentencing in which he would have received at least 17 years. He had been the driver in a drive-by shooting in New Jersey in what prosecutors said was a gang feud.

A reward of $8,000 has been offered for the men's recapture, and a full inquiry ordered into prison security.