Christmas is coming this year on board the biggest ship afloat, on its maiden voyage from China. To the relief of children, parents and shopkeepers everywhere - but to the despair of European manufacturers - mountains of crackers, toys and games as well as decorations, wrapping paper, food and every imaginable gift are on the way to Felixstowe, Suffolk, aboard the Emma Maersk 3.

If anything should happen to this 400m-long, 61 metre-high boat, that is as wide as a motorway and is powered by the largest diesel engine ever built, then Christmas might have to be cancelled. The 3,000 containers of goods that it will drop off in Britain on its way to mainland Europe contain the largest amount of Christmas goods ever delivered - a floating world of British desires and necessities. Crackers, poker tables, bingo sets, drum kits, electronic toys and pre-school building blocks will be delivered in astonishing quantities: 1,886,000 Christmas decorations are loaded in one container, 40,000 rechargeable batteries and 22,280kg of Vietnam tea in another. In another are 12,800 MP3 players.

There are potato mashers and spoons to cook with, leather sofas to recline on, new spectacles to watch new televisions by, and pyjamas to go to bed in. Pets will be especially happy; 138,000 tins of catfood are on their way, as are mountains of dogfood. But the ship and its cargo was the subject of an intense row over the increasing number of imports from China. Caroline Lucas, Green Member of European Parliament (MEP) for southeast England, said it was a "microcosm of globalisation gone mad". "All these goods could have been made in Europe," said Ms Lucas "Whole sectors of global trade are now being dominated by China. The real cost of the goods that the Emma Maersk is bringing in should include the environment, the markets destroyed in developing countries and the millions of jobs lost." Britain exported more than GBP 2.8bn of goods to China last year but imported nearly GBP 16bn, a 30-fold increase on 1980. The UK is Europe's third-biggest trading partner with China but in global terms represents less than 2% of China's trade.

The Emma Maersk is carrying about 11,000 containers and is by far the largest container ship ever built. Yentian port, from which it set off last month, now exports nearly three times that many containers every day.

Last year Ms Lucas led an EU study into trade with China and found its implications terrifying. "These are the goods that Europe used to make. We are faced with a country that has an almost absolute advantage in an increasing number of sectors. This a triumph for multinational capital, not for Chinese workers who, as well as suffering from some of the worst labour exploitation on record, are also losing jobs at a phenomenal rate," she said.

The Emma Maersk, the first of a fleet of seven equally large container ships, will soon be on its way back to China taking back the waste of Christmas. One of Britain's biggest exports to China is now waste plastic - which is turned back into soft toys and decorations.
