The artist's impression looks like something out of a science fiction film. But a hypersonic passenger plane that could fly to Australia from northern Europe in less than five hours has been designed in Britain. With money from the European Space Agency, a team of engineers and scientists has designed the A2, a plane they believe could carry 300 passengers at a top speed of more than 3,000mph. The project is part of an EU programme to develop air travel. Scientists were asked to find out if it was possible to build a commercial plane that used the sort of technology used in space travel.

UK-based Reaction Engines designs and develops space transport and hi-tech rocket systems. Its directors are experts in different fields - from space rockets and weapons systems to nuclear power. One of the firm's main projects is the development of Skylon, a pilotless, reusable space plane, which will provide inexpensive and reliable access to space. It will take approximately ten years to develop Skylon, which will be capable of transporting 12 tonnes of cargo into space.

Alan Bond, a senior engineer and managing director at the company, said the A2 could be operating within 25 years, if there was sufficient demand for it. Bond said: "The A2 is designed to leave Brussels international airport, fly quietly and subsonically out into the north Atlantic at mach 0.9 before reaching mach 5 across the North Pole and flying over the Pacific to Australia. The flight time from Brussels to Australia, allowing for air traffic control, would be four hours 40 minutes. If you compare it with air travel today, it sounds incredible but I don't see why future generations can't make day trips to Australasia." 

Reaction Engines estimates that the flight would cost about the same as the current first class fare to Australia. Moreover, according to the company, the plane would not be able to reach the necessary speed with normal aviation fuels so Reaction Engines has designed an engine that would run on liquid hydrogen. A spin-off is that liquid hydrogen could be much greener than conventional fuel. It doesn't produce large amounts of carbon emissions but gives off water vapour and nitrous oxide. 

Another advantage of the design is that, although the 132 metre-long A2 is much bigger than conventional jets, it would be lighter than a Boeing 747 and could land on the airport runways used today. But there are a few problems. For one thing, the A2 might not be great for anyone who suffers from claustrophobia, as it does not have portholes. When travelling at hypersonic speeds, the amount of heat generated would make it difficult to install windows that are secure and not too heavy. One solution Reaction Engines has proposed is to install flat screen panels instead of windows. These would show images of the scene outside. 

In recent days, people have been discussing the design excitedly on science and environment message boards. Some believe it would be too expensive to produce commercially. There is also concern that producing the liquid hydrogen could be more environmentally damaging than Reaction Engines believes. And there are fears that because the plane would fly at around the height of the ozone layer, it could cause damage to the atmosphere. 

But Bond says that within 25 years, 10% of air travel could be hypersonic. Some routes, such as Europe to India, would not work so well, because the plane would have to go a long way round to avoid having to travel at supersonic speeds over populated areas. But he thought the A2 could get to California by travelling hypersonically across the Atlantic, then conventionally across the US. Reaction Engines says the A2 would be quieter than Concorde was. 

Bond agrees that the project is only in its initial stages. The next phase is more work on the effect of the A2 on the environment. "Our work shows that it is possible technically; now it's up to the world to decide if it wants it."

