On December 12 people at Pepsi Cola's headquarters were probably drinking champagne rather than cola. By the end of trading on Wall Street that day, the company's market value reached $98.4bn while the market valued Pepsi Cola's rival Coca-Cola at $97.9bn. For the first time in the history of the two companies, PepsiCo was valued more highly than its old arch enemy. It was mainly a symbolic event but it was a powerful symbol - and one that remained over the days that followed. The "real thing" is suddenly second-best. 
 
The battle for supremacy between Coca-Cola and PepsiCo is one of the great rivalries in business. The two firms are still the number one case study for marketing students on how to create a powerful brand around something as simple as brown carbonated water mixed with caffeine and vegetable extracts. More recently they have become case studies for another reason: PepsiCo for its ability to identify consumer trends and adapt its business to a changing climate; Coca-Cola for its inability to do the same after its long history as the number one best-selling drink in the world. 

In early 2000 Coca-Cola's market value was about $128bn, almost three times that of PepsiCo, which was valued at $44bn. Fizzy drinks sales at both companies are flat in developed markets. The main factor in the different fortunes of the two companies has been PepsiCo's diversification away from sugary carbonated drinks and the realisation that consumers were worrying more and more about obesity and health. 

In 1998 the company bought the fruit juice business Tropicana. Three years later it bought Quaker Oats, paying $14bn and adding the energy drink Gatorade to its product range. Coca-Cola has the opportunity to buy Quaker Oats but some of its independent directors said the price was too high. That was a bad decision. Today PepsiCo has about 81% of the fast-growing sports drink market in the US. It has the number one fruit juice brand in Tropicana and the leading bottled water brand in the US, Aquafina. In the most recent quarter, sales of PepsiCo's non-carbonated drinks grew by 24%. 

PepsiCo gets about 23% of its worldwide profits from the almost flat carbonated drinks sector while Coca-Cola relies on its fizzy drinks for 85% of its profits. PepsiCo also owns snack foods including Walkers Crisps and Doritos, and this diverse range of products, helps it to gain influence with supermarket chains. 

Coca-Cola is trying to catch up. In June it launched its Minute Maid pure juice range in Britain. It has also introduced the Dasani bottled water brand and the Powerade energy drink. Powerade is about one-fifth as big as Gatorade in the US. When Coca-Cola launched Dasani in Britain, it received very bad publicity when the press realised it was distilled tap water and then when it was removed from sale after a health scare. 

PepsiCo shares have risen 14% the past year while Coca-Cola's fell 1.2%. Coca-Cola's problems seem to have started when its highly regarded chief executive Roberto Goizueta died in 1997. The company then suffered from under-investment, job losses and numerous changes of management. In May 2004 the company hired its third chief executive since Mr Goizueta's death when it persuaded the Irishman Neville Isdell to come out of retirement. Mr Isdell's was 60 years old and had worked for Coca Cola for many years. The US stock market did not see him as the new blood or the agent for change that Coca-Cola needed. 
 
Soon after he became chief executive, Mr Isdell was open about Coca-Cola's mistakes. He reduced the company's long-term profit and sales targets, and said there were no easy answers. The company, he said, had missed consumer trends and under-performed since 1997. There had been an absence of effective advertising. He promised an additional $400m for marketing and promised to target growing markets such as China and India more energetically. The company is now spending more on developing new products. Mr Isdell has also fired senior managers and got rid of brands that were not selling well. The most spectacular disaster for Coca Cola was the launch of C2, a low carbohydrate version of Coke, which came on the market just as the fashion for low-carb diets was beginning to disappear 
 
But it seems that Mr Isdell is making some progress and market analysts have begun to express some optimism. The company's profits have increased over the past year. Earnings in the third quarter of the year were up 37% to $1.28bn, mainly as a result of strong growth in developing markets such as China, Russia and Latin America. In the meantime PepsiCo is continuing to press home its advantage. The company says it is focusing its research and development efforts on healthier products including Tropicana fruit bars and a carbonated version of Tropicana fruit juices.