Former Russian president Boris Yeltsin was buried yesterday in the peaceful surroundings of Moscow's Novodevichy cemetery. Before his coffin was covered and lowered into the ground, his widow, Naina, came forward to say farewell. She kissed him several times. Then as Russia's national anthem sounded,Yeltsin sank into his final resting place. The funeral was attended by several ex-world leaders, including Bill Clinton and George Bush Snr. Also there were former UK prime minister John Major and the Polish Solidarity leader Lech Walesa.

Yeltsin died of heart failure at the age of 76. As Russian president, he presided over a series of historical changes ? the end of the cold war, the collapse of the Soviet empire and a period of chaos and liberty. His state funeral was another change: a conscious return to Russia's old pre-revolutionary traditions. It was the first time since 1894 and the death of Tsar Alexander III that a Russian head of state had been buried in a Russian Orthodox church.

Since Soviet times, and Lenin's freezing funeral in January 1924, all Russian leaders except Khrushchev have been buried near the Kremlin Wall. Yeltsin's funeral took place in the cathedral of Christ the Saviour ? an enormous church with a gold dome not far from the Kremlin. It was blown up by Stalin in 1931 but rebuilt during Yeltsin's presidency as a symbol of national revival. 

Hundreds of mourners had queued round the block to pay their respects to Yeltsin, whose body had lain in state for two days. His open coffin was covered by a Russian flag. Mourners went past one by one, laying flowers. "He was a strong man," Dmitry Samarin, his former bodyguard, said outside the church. Was he a good leader, though? "History is a very difficult thing," he replied carefully. "He managed to defeat the communist leadership. I don't think anybody else could have done it." 

Arytom Leonidovich, a 26-year-old architect, said it was a complicated question. "I think in time history will record that he did more positive than negative things. The fall of the communist regime was largely because of him. "He also had many human qualities. He was kind, unlike the leadership we've got now."
 
Russian state television yesterday broadcast hours of programmes about Yeltsin. Flags flew at half-mast. But many ordinary Russians clearly still think Yeltsin's seven and a half years as president were a disaster. There were few mourners along the funeral route. The country has been split over what it thinks about Yeltsin. Some praise him for bringing freedom and helping defeat a coup attempt by former Soviet hardliners; others blame him for handing over state assets to oligarchs and damaging the country's name with his drunken behaviour. 

TV coverage made little mention of his disastrous decision to go to war against Chechen rebels in 1994. Instead it concentrated on the good things ? Yeltsin's friendly relationship with ordinary Russians and his obvious love for his children and grandchildren. Communist MPs, however, refused to stand for a moment of silence in Yeltsin's memory in parliament yesterday. "We will never give honour to the destroyer of the fatherland," communist MP Viktor Ilyukhin said.
 
Other former enemies were more generous. Former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev - who lost his job when Yeltsin dismantled the Soviet Union - kissed his widow and offered his condolences. John Major and Bill Clinton gave her a hug. Mr Putin and his wife, Ludmilla, stood silently nearby. Every member of Russia's cabinet was there, including Sergei Ivanov and Dmitry Medvedev, the two men who will probably contest next year's presidential election. Also there was Roman Abramovich, an oligarch who accumulated his billion-dollar fortune during Yeltsin's rule. 

At the service, bearded priests sang passages from the gospels and prayed for Yeltsin's sins. Metropolitan Yuvenaly, the second most senior cleric in the Orthodox church, told mourners Yeltsin had given people the freedom they sought. Russia's first president should be remembered for this, he said. "Russia today lives a full life and is returning to its historic traditions. This is the first time in 100 years we are saying goodbye to a Russian head of state in a church with prayers.
