The trial of 17 women accused of having abortions at an illegal clinic in a northern Portuguese town ended last week with a prison sentence for the nurse who ran the clinic, but only one of the women found guilty. Sandra Cardoso, 21, who said that extreme poverty, the violence of her partner and the sickness of her daughter had made her go to the illegal clinic in Maia three years ago, was ordered to pay a small fine or spend four months in prison. The judges could have sentenced her to up to three years in prison. 

They were much stricter with Maria do Ceu, the nurse who ran the clinic. She was sentenced to eight-and-a-half years in prison. Three of those years were for breaking the very strict abortion laws in this strongly Roman Catholic country. The rest were for stealing morphine and other dangerous drugs from a hospital. Six other people who worked with her were given the option of paying fines or serving up to six months in jail. The panel of three judges said: "Weunderstand the political, social and scientific debates surrounding this matter, but we must follow the law." The trial was held in a large tent at Maia's tennis club, because the town's law courts were not big enough. 

Supporters of the accused women had mixed reactions to the judgment. "We are glad for these women, because none of them will go to jail now," said Silvestrina Silva, of the Right to Choice group. "But that does not stop it being shameful that they have been put through this painful trial. The trial shows that illegal abortions in this country are a fact, and that people are still punished for aborting in this country," she said. Dina Nunes, a psychologist, said: "The court could have put thousands of women on trial because there are many, many more who have illegal abortions. This is the 21st century, but women in Portugal still do not have the rightto decide what they do with their own bodies and lives." 

The court heard that women who became pregnant in Maia or nearby Oporto and did not have the money to travel to abortion clinics in Spain were told about the secret clinic by hospital personnel, chemists, taxi drivers or their own friends or relatives. The pregnant women had to pay $450 for the operation but none of them had enough money. Thy all left items of jewellery - wedding rings, necklaces or earrings . as surety while they tried to find the rest of the money. 

The case divided Portuguese opinion and brought humiliation and trauma to the 17 accused. Most of the women come from the working-class districts of Maia, from backward villages in the Tras Os Montes region in the north, or the slums of Oporto. All of them were arrested because of the jewellery they gave the nurse who ran the clinic. "They are all poor, otherwise they would have gone to Spain or somewhere else," said Ms Silva, whose group helped to organise international support for the Maia women. 

Supporters say the women are martyrs. "Women are scared of sex, scared of being punished and scared of dying in the clinics. There is evidence that pregnancy is a significant factor in suicides in young people," said Milice Ribeiro, a psychologist. 

Campaigners demanded a new abortion law for Portuguese women last week, saying that the current law put lives at risk, and was ignored by up to 40,000 women who visited illegal clinics every year. Duarte Vilar, the director of Portugal's Family Planning Association, said: "Illegal abortions have caused a number of deaths and thousands of hospital admissions. It is time this was treated as a matter of public health." 