The Vatican has published a document containing its views on the most typical characteristics of women: "Listening, welcoming, humility, faithfulness, praise and waiting." In its most important statement on the role of women in almost ten years, the Roman Catholic Church said these virtues of the Virgin Mary were ones women showed "with particular intensity and naturalness".

The 37-page statement, published in full last Sunday, was written by the Pope's leading theologian, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger. Because it is an official Vatican statement, it is likely that it was read, and perhaps amended, by the Pope himself before it was published. The document will probably produce a lot of discussion about the characteristics of women. It says: "Women preserve the deep intuition of the goodness in their lives ... and contribute to the growth and protection [of others]. This intuition is linked to women's physical capacity to give life. This capacity is a reality that has a strong effect on the nature of the female personality". 

In his Letter to the Bishops of the Catholic Church on the Collaboration of Men and Women in the Church and in the World, Cardinal Ratzinger criticises "ideas that are often at variance with the true progress of women". He said that one of these was the idea that women were regarded as less important than men. This idea created antagonism and implied that "women, in order to be themselves, must make themselves the enemies of men". Confrontational thinking like this was "leading to harmful confusion . . . and had a negative effect on the structure of the family. 

The differences between men and women were becoming lost in this "gender war", he said. "To avoid the domination of one sex or the other some people deny these differences and regard them simply as the effects of historical and cultural conditioning." This view ignored the qualities that came from a woman's unique ability to give birth. This ability "allows her to become mature very quickly, and gives a sense of the seriousness of life and of its responsibilities. A sense and a respect for what is concrete develop in her". The cardinal uses the document to argue that, because they have something unique to contribute, "women should be present in the world of work and in the organisation of society".

The document received a mixed reaction from feminists and women writers. Erin Pizzey, founder of the international women's refuge movement, said: "Catholic priests and bishops cannot marry so I don't think the Catholic Church is in a position to make statements like this."

But Catherine Pepinster, editor of the British Catholic journal The Tablet, said many women would identify strongly with the comments. "It is typical of feminists to give a knee-jerk reaction to this document. It makes a distinction between the sexes, but it also says that women have a big role to play in society." 

