For many years the city of Mostar in Bosnia-Hercegovina has been a symbol of the problems of the region. It is a city where the takeaway pizza
restaurant will not deliver pizzas to the Muslims on the other side of the river. It is a city where you can identify who is a Croat and who is a Muslim by their different mobile telephone numbers and servers. It is a place where there is a separate education system for Croats and Muslims from kindergarten to university. It is also a place where you still cannot take a bus across the old front line from the Bosnian war. In short, it is still a divided city. 

But last week something remarkable happened. Milan Milesovic, a Croat ambulance driver from the Croat west side of the city, drove his ambulance over one of the bridges over the Neretva River in response to an emergency call from a Muslim on the other side. 

Until the Bosnian war of 1992-95, Mostar was probably the most ethnically integrated city in all of former Yugoslavia. But then the war came and ethnic cleansing began. The result is that Mostar became the most divided town in Bosnia, a victory for the Croatian nationalists who, with their Serbian counterparts, wanted to destroy the city and to remove Bosnia-Herzegovina from the map of Europe. 

Just over 10 years ago, Croatian guns finally destroyed Mostar's world-famous Old Bridge, a masterpiece of Turkish architecture built in 1566. 
The beautiful bridge fell into the fast green waters of the Neretva. The bridge was a symbol of Mostar and its destruction seemed to symbolise the city's death. 

Then last week, after years of careful work and at a cost of $9m, the Old Bridge reopened again, a perfect replica built of the same local stone. 

Ever since the end of the war, Croatian nationalists in west Mostar and the ruling Bosnian Muslim party on the east have worked together to 
keep the city divided. In March, however, Paddy Ashdown, the international governor of Bosnia, acted to reverse a process that has left Mostar looking like a Balkan Beirut or Nicosia. He issued an order removing the old municipalities from power and defining Mostar as a single unified city. 

The first result of this order was Mr Milesovic's ambulance crossing the river. This month the Muslim and Croat emergency medical services 
were merged. Last month the two firefighting services merged. The city authorities also agreed a single city budget for the first time since the war. 

A western official who has been in Bosnia for more than five years says, however, that the main Croat and Muslim parties are using Ashdown's
plans for their own purposes. "They've pushed out the moderates and made the divisions within the city administration even greater. Things are getting better, but it's very hard with these nationalist parties in power. The Croats have got a majority now, and they think they can control the councils," he said. 

"I'd drive to the other side if there was a need," said a driver of the No 10 bus service operating in the Muslim east. "But hardly anyone goes from one side to the other." The Croats have just agreed that Muslims can join the beautiful old grammar school in September, but only on a separate, segregated floor, and with separate educational programmes for Muslims and Croats. But many signs of the old conflict remain. The Croats have just built a new steeple on the cathedral that is much higher than the tallest minaret of the city's 16th-century mosques. And they have also built a 30m illuminated cross on Hum hill overlooking the old Muslim sector of Mostar.
