When the bridegroom, Tri Cayono, and the bride, Yanti, saw each other on their wedding day, their reactions were rather unusual for a future husband and wife. Yanti greeted Tri with a formal handshake and a nervous smile. Tri nodded briefly at her and moved away. During the evening they did now show any affection towards one another. They did not kiss. They didn't want to cuddle one another, even when the photographer tried to persuade them to do so.
 
This is an example of the traditions that continue to exist in many parts of Indonesia. Not only had Yanti, 22, a restaurant cook, and Tri, 24, a farmer, just met for the first time, they hardly knew anything about each other. "Er, what does he like to do in his spare time?' Yanti asked a cousin the day before the wedding. 

Two months ago Tri told his friends and family that he wanted to marry a girl from central Java. "I think they're cooler and more fun," he said. The fact that he didn't know any girls from central Java wasn't a problem for him. A friend of his, Fajar, said he had a cousin, Mursiyati, who might be a good wife. Tri accepted the offer immediately. Mursiyati's parents forced her to accept Tri's offer ? the fact that Tri has a one and a quarter acre (0.5 hectare) farm was very attractive to her labourer father ? and she agreed to marry Tri. A month later Mursiyati met someone she liked and married her new boyfriend instead. But Tri was still determined to marry a woman from central Java and Fajar felt he had to find one for him. 

So early in June the family suggested Yanti, a cousin. Again land was the central factor. "As soon as I heard her voice, saw her photo and learnt she was a cook, I knew that she was the woman for me," Tri said, unconvincingly. Yanti said she was "happy and excited" at the prospect of marrying Tri, but her father, Saulusmin, was not. "I mean they haven't even met - how can they get married?' he said. But he did want to argue with his wife, Gina. "She would have been angry with me if I had objected. It would not have been pleasant," Saulusmin said. 

It is impossible to know how many Indonesians end up in arranged marriages like these. Saman, the cleric who married Yanti and Tri, said "extreme" stories such as theirs, where the couple had not met, are rare and perhaps only 1% of marriages are like this. "But there are many where the children do what they're told," he said. Tini, a maid in Jakarta who ran away after her parents tried to force her, at the age of 15, to marry a 28-year-old, thinks about a third of all marriages in her district take place without the full agreement of the bride and groom. 

World Vision, an international aid agency, says that arranged marriages are "still common" and experts say it is unlikely they will die out soon. "It's the tradition and it's hard to go against traditions," said Gadis Arivia, of the women's group Jurnal Perempuan. "Parents don't believe in modern practices, particularly when they see divorce rates going up. Daughters who obey their parents get support. The disobedient ones have a much harder life."
 
The series of recent natural disasters and communal conflicts in Indonesia have also helped to maintain the tradition, said Samsidar, a commissioner of the National Commission for Violence Against Women. "In situations where women have died, it is traditional for their younger sisters to look after their children, and this usually means they have to marry the widower," she said. There is also a strong economic aspect. "After something like the tsunami many people had financial problems," Samsidar said. "So we saw a lot of people hurrying to marry off their children to make their own lives that much easier."
 
Back in Bumi Agung, Yanti tried to convince everyone she was happy. "If I don't have to go to work again - it's his job to provide for me - and if I can have a couple of children, then I'll be happy," she said. "And I'll probably be able to come back and visit central Java once a year."

