(Note that some words, written in italics and marked like this*, are explained in the footnotes at the end of the article.)

A huge asteroid flies in from outer space to destroy the Earth, an unstoppable force of nature from which there is no escape. Perhaps a disaster like this killed off the dinosaurs, and most experts think it is only a matter of time before the same thing happens to us.

But perhaps not all hope is lost. Hundreds of scientists, from nuclear weapons engineers to planetary experts, are coming to Washington this week to try to develop a master plan to protect the Earth from such an asteroid. 

The Planetary Defence Conference, organised by the US Aerospace Corporation, will discuss lots of ideas on how to develop technology to locate and redirect objects heading towards the Earth. The conference will also consider the difficult problem of public relations - is it best to warn people if the worst comes to the worst? 

Many smaller objects around the Earth's orbit break up when they reach the atmosphere and 
this is no more dangerous than a short fireworks display. But there are also large asteroids or comets, also called near-Earth objects* (NEOs). A NEO wider than 1km collides with Earth every few hundred thousand years. An NEO larger than 6km, which could cause total extinction, will collide with Earth every 100 million years. Experts agree that we should expect a big one soon. 

A 390-metre wide asteroid named Apophis was discovered in 2004. This has an outside chance* of hitting the Earth in 2036. If it hit, Apophis would release more than 100,000 times the energy released in the Hiroshima nuclear bomb. This blast would directly affect thousands of square kilometres, but the dust released into the atmosphere would affect the whole planet. There could be dark skies* for a year or more, destroying crops worldwide. 

Dr Barbee, a US space expert, thinks that if it collided with Earth, it would be a disaster. "Such events have occurred in the past and will 
occur again in the future". But now, for the first time in known history, humanity may have the technology to stop it happening. 

Dr Barbee thinks the answer is nuclear. If a nuclear weapon hit the edge of the asteroid, it could cause the NEO to change direction, and "miss Earth rather than collide." The advantage of this idea is that it is possible with current technology - though no one has actually tried it yet. 

Piet Hut, another expert, has a less dangerous idea - a robotic tugboat that could attach itself to an asteroid and push it out of the Earth'path. Modern technology would warn scientists 10 years in advance, to send the tugboat into position in good time. 

The tugboat would be driven by an ion engine. These engines don't burn chemicals for fuel; they drive a spacecraft forwards by forcing electrically charged particles backwards. The pressure is very slight - but the engine is very efficient and lasts far longer than normal rocket engines. Prof Hut calculates that such an engine could deflect NEOs up to 800 metres across. 

Ion engines would also be essential for another idea, the "gravity tractor". But instead of landing on an asteroid, the gravity tractor would hover near it, using the slight gravitational attraction* between the probe and the NEO to change its path. 

Psychologists will attend the Washington meeting as well as technologists. They will consider how the public would react psychologically to news of a possible collision. Al Harrison, a leading US social psychologist, says an NEO collision would present unique problems for the authorities, as they could know about a "near extinction level" danger so long in advance.

The psychologists will discuss whether this kind of news should be kept secret, to prevent public panic. In December 2004, for example, scientists calculated that if Apophis did hit, it would land somewhere on a line between central Europe, the Middle East, the Ganges River valley (the most populated district on Earth), and the Philippines. At the time, the information was kept secret, and many NEO scientists agreed it was the right thing to do. 

But Clark Chapman, a US planetary scientist, says many social science experts are against secrecy. Their studies do not suggest that the public would immediately panic about a possible danger. But the news must be given carefully, or people might misunderstand, become unnecessarily frightened, stop believing official statements and ignore important warnings. 

Footnotes 

Near-Earth objects 

Comets and asteroids pulled into orbits near the Earth by gravity from planets. Most NEOs are made of ice and dust, or are bits of rock from the asteroid belt between Jupiter and Mars.

Outside chance 

Apophis was discovered in June 2004. In December that year, astronomers started to worry. When they calculated its future orbit, they thought it was very likely to hit the Earth in 2029. 

When the asteroid passes the Earth again on April 13 2029, the Earth will probably deflect it, and change its orbit. But if that change makes Apophis pass through a particular point in space, called "the keyhole", it will collide with the Earth next time it passes, in 2036. However, current information suggests that Apophis is very unlikely to pass through the keyhole, a patch of space just 600 metres wide. The possibility is only 1 in 5,500. 

Dark skies 

Scientists have estimated the effects of a massive asteroid collision by examining simulations of what would happen during a big nuclear war.

Slight gravitational attraction 

Everything in the universe that has mass attracts anything else with mass via the force of gravity. If a "gravity tractor" is placed near an asteroid, the asteroid will move fractionally towards it. Over a distance of millions of kilometers, even a slight deflection could move the asteroid out of the Earth's way.