Cuba's national assembly has unanimously named Raul Castro as head of state, and formally ended almost half a century of Fidel Castro's rule. The 76-year-old defence minister took power in a display of party unity which portrayed his elder brother as the voice of the revolution. The Cuban constitution had designated Raul as Fidel's successor so his appointment was expected but the appointment of a hardliner as his deputy was a surprise. Jose Ramon Machado, a 77-year-old veteran of Fidel's guerrilla war, was given the post ahead of young potential reformers.

In his first speech as leader, Raul, wearing a suit and tie instead of his usual army uniform, promised he would consult Fidel on important decisions of state. "The commander in chief of the Cuban revolution is unique. Fidel is Fidel, as we all know well, he is irreplaceable," he said. The new president said the Communist party would ensure socialism lived on after Fidel and his generation. "Our task is clear ... to continue strengthening the revolution at a historic moment. This is particularly important when the generation which led the revolution is disappearing," he said.

The Cuban authorities tried to show a sense of normality and continuity so there was no sense of drama in the 614-seat parliament as the historic events took place. The streets of Havana were quiet as people followed the latest step in Fidel's gradual departure from public life, a process he began 19 months ago when he gave up power temporarily to undergo emergency surgery. Last week the convalescing 81-year-old said he would not accept another term as president.

Raul, who was head of the temporary government, was given a standing ovation by the members of parliament before being confirmed as head of state and government. The assembly also named a 31-member council of state. The calm atmosphere reflected the authorities' tight control over the island and its 11 million people, many of whom want an end to poverty that is worse than that in eastern Europe before the fall of the Berlin wall.

The American government called on Havana to move towards democracy, a move which suggested that Cuba still retains the initiative in spite of the economic embargo imposed by the Americans. "We urge the Cuban government to begin a process of peaceful, democratic change by releasing all political prisoners, respecting human rights and creating a clear pathway toward free and fair elections," Condoleeza Rice, the secretary of state, said in a statement.

It is still unclear how much influence Fidel will retain. He is still leader of the Communist party and an assembly member, and writes newspaper editorials, though the author's name has changed from Commander in Chief to Comrade Fidel. When his name was mentioned in the assembly, there was a standing ovation. The assembly, whose members are elected from a list fixed by the authorities, has always been a rubber stamp for Fidel who ruled the country almost single-handedly after the 1959 revolution.

Raul has a more collegiate style, and under his rule the council of state will probably have more power. The president, who has always avoided publicity, is believed to be in favour of a Chinese-type economic liberalization to improve living standards without loosening political control. He has encouraged criticism of the system, raising expectations that delivering better food, transport and housing rather than just making speeches would be a characteristic of his rule.

Under Raul the military has taken control of much of the economy ? managing farms, tourist resorts and other businesses and giving senior officers political power. But since taking over, the younger Castro has not introduced many reforms, possibly because the hardliners in the government have prevented them, arguing that support from oil-rich Venezuela would allow Cuba to return to basic communism.

