The landscaped neighbourhoods outside the Argentine capital Buenos Aires have plush houses with gardens and swimming pools. When you look at these estates, it is difficult to imagine that just five years ago Argentina was in the middle of an economic crisis that made millions jobless, destroyed the middle class and turned one of South America's safest capitals into a hunting ground for muggers and kidnappers. But today, if you visit these neighbourhoods, you find new cars parked in driveways and architects designing home extensions. The economic recovery of Argentina has been remarkable.

But there is a catch. These neighbourhoods are gated communities surrounded by walls, razor wire and uniformed guards carrying guns and two-way radios. The country has recovered but it is different. More than 400 mostly new neighbourhoods have been built on what were swamps and cornfields outside Buenos Aires, providing homes for about 300,000 people and covering more land than the city they left behind. Outsiders need ID to enter these communities. 

"You can't see the poor here, that's one reason why people like it," says Ramiro Figueroa, 30, a polo player and estate agent who lives in Tortugas about an hour's drive from the capital. "I love it here. Everything is secure. I leave my windows open at night. The worst thing that can happen is a stolen bicycle." Gated communities have also been a feature of post-apartheid South Africa, as the middle classes try to escape from crime in the city centres. The fact that this is now happening in Argentina is causing an anguished debate about whether the country's society, which was once considered South America's most "European" and egalitarian, is also becoming polarized in the same way as South Africa and Brazil. 

Despite the recovery, 40% of the people of Argentina still live in poverty. You can see this from the shanty towns around Buenos Aires. Vagrants sleep in doorways next to tourist areas and children in ragged clothes beg at traffic lights. Many of the people living in the gated communities do not see such sights, says Celina Murga, 34, a film director. "The children growing up in these places are very different from others; they don't know how to behave in the real world." She is making a film, A Week Alone, about youths in a gated community who are left unsupervised. "I want to show that this is a social crisis," says Ms Murga. "People living outside the fences joke that the children inside think everyone travels in golf carts and they have no idea what traffic lights are." 

At first, the economic crisis of December 2001 united the middle class and the poor in their anger against the government and financial institutions, which people blamed for the collapse of businesses and the loss of all the money they had saved. That changed when armed gangs started attacking people in rich districts of Buenos Aires, creating the impression that crime was out of control. Hundreds of thousands of people protested after the kidnap and murder of a young man, Axel Blumberg. As the economy began to recover from 2003, more and more people moved to gated communities. The high walls of the gated communities now line the 10-lane motorways out of Buenos Aires. 

"If it is a bit off the highway and they have to drive through a poor neighbourhood to reach home people do not buy them. They are afraid of kidnapping," says Peter Haller, a property consultant. Some people move to gated areas because they are seen as a symbol of success, he said. "It takes you to another social level." The original communities were founded 70 years ago as weekend retreats for the super rich, and the feeling that they are exclusive is still there. 

Foreigners are now buying apartments in central Buenos Aires, believing that it is a good investment and a good place to live, says Mr Haller. About a third of city centre properties are bought by Europeans and North Americans. The middle-class exodus shows no sign of slowing down and lax planning regulations mean it is easy to develop new sites. 

The economic recovery is a dramatic change from the dark days of 2002. Now the government is more popular and many people feel the country has recovered its independence. But this mood of confidence has not stopped banks, supermarkets and restaurants leaving the city in the same way that South African companies left central Johannesburg for the northern suburbs 10 years ago.

People living in the communities say that they are not isolated. High levels of crime and the heavy traffic of central Buenos Aires meant that parents had to accompany children when they went out, so they were the ones living in bubbles, not those in the gated areas, says Connie Burgwardt, a 40-year-old lawyer. She moved two years ago to Santa Barbara, a complex 16 miles north of the city, and her social life has never been better. Her parents and siblings live nearby, as do half her friends, and every weekend there's a barbecue or party. "For GBP40,000 my choice was 40 square metres in the city - or 160 here. With a garden and a swimming pool. You don't think twice. It's like a dream ... I won't go away from here unless I'm dead."

