Medical experts have praised the former deputy prime minister of the United Kingdom, John Prescott, for his 'brave' admission that he suffered from the eating disorder bulimia for twenty years. In his autobiography, Prescott says that the stress of political life led him to seek comfort in food and then force himself to throw up. He says he began suffering from bulimia in the 1980s, when he was under great pressure in his work as a politician. He struggled with the condition throughout his time in government, gorging on burgers, chocolate, crisps and fish and chips. But he now says he has been free of the problem for more than a year.

"I'm sure it was to do with stress," he wrote in the Sunday Times newspaper. "I wasn't doing it all the time, and sometimes there were gaps of weeks and months, but during those years when we first got into power, when I had too much work to do I use to find comfort in eating." He added: "I've never confessed it before. Probably because of shame or embarrassment ? or just because it's such a strange thing for someone like me to confess to. People normally associate it with young women ? anorexic girls, models trying to keep their weight down, or women in stressful situations, like Princess Diana." 

He also said he used to eat sweet things and Chinese food when things became stressful. "I could drink a whole tin of condensed milk, just for the taste, stupid things like that. And whenever I go to Mr Chu's in Hull, my favourite Chinese restaurant in the whole world ... I could eat everything on the menu."

Although Prescott tried to hide the illness from his wife, she realized what was going on. "The signs in the toilet gave it away, and all the missing food." She encouraged him to see a doctor and a consultant eventually diagnosed him with bulimia. "I arrived at the consultant's and found his waiting room full of young women. I was the only man there. I felt a complete idiot. Luckily none of them told the newspapers about me." In the book, he also says that, despite preferring food to alcohol, he would occasionally drink to relieve the stress and to let people know how low he was feeling.

"Once or twice a year, when I was absolutely knackered, I used to get out a bottle of vodka and place it on my desk. The office hated it when they saw what was happening. They knew I'd drink it really quickly, as I always do with anything, and finish the whole bottle. But that was very rare." Prescott, who resigned as deputy prime minister last year, is now supporting a National Health Service campaign to raise awareness of eating disorders. 

The eating disorder support charity Beat said Prescott's decision to speak out had shown considerable courage. "It will help other people to realize that men can suffer from eating disorders and you can get help and treatment ? even if you have been ill for a very long time," said the charity's chief executive, Susan Ringwood. "It is a brave thing to do because people do feel ashamed of themselves and find it really hard even to tell close family members." 

Although 80% of new cases of eating disorders are girls and young women aged between 12 and 20, boys and men are also affected. "It is probably under-diagnosed ? even doctors don't necessarily think it can affect a boy or a man," said Ringwood. "Anybody could have this condition, including people who are in the public eye," she said. "People absolutely shouldn't be ashamed. We need to get past the embarrassment and shame that is associated with an eating disorder." 

Dr Ty Glover, a consultant psychiatrist and expert on eating disorders, described Prescott's confession as "a very brave and courageous thing". He added: "It's hard enough for a young girl to confess to, but for a high-profile male politician who is nearly 70, it's especially impressive." Glover said he had never before heard of a man of Prescott's age with bulimia. "It seriously makes me think that maybe we're completely missing a large number of middle-aged men who are too scared to admit they have a problem. "John's bravery will hopefully encourage more men to stop suffering in silence and seek treatment."

It is believed that there are more than one million people in Britain with an eating disorder such as bulimia or anorexia, 90% of whom are women.

