Alternative medicines are fast becoming more and more popular in Britain. Sales of herbal and homeopathic remedies in chemists, health stores and supermarkets have doubled in the last decade and are now estimated to be worth GBP200m a year.

And there is no sign that this trend is going to change as consumers - the majority of whom are women aged 35 years and over - keep on buying 'natural' pills, potions and ointments, according to new research. Sales are predicted to reach GBP265m in the next four years. Growth has been particularly rapid in the past five years, according to the British Lifestyles report by researchers Mintel, as natural cures get "a greater reputation for offering legitimate alternatives to pharmaceutical-based treatments".

One reason for the increase in sales is that the British government has relaxed regulations on prescription-only drugs, and at the same time is promoting the role of the pharmacist. This has encouraged more people to try alternative treatments which they would probably not have considered had they visited their GPs. New EU legislation, which requires all over-the-counter herbal medicines in the UK to have either Traditional Herbal Medicines Registration or full Marketing Authorization, will give the industry further legitimacy.

Herbal medicines, which contain extracts from plants and minerals, account for the fastest growth in sales. Scientific tests have shown there is evidence that some could have a beneficial effect. More controversial are the homeopathic remedies, which critics claim offer nothing more than a placebo effect. Homeopathy is a system of therapy based on the concept that disease can be treated with drugs, in minute doses.

Modern lifestyles, longer working hours and increased levels of stress have all contributed to the love affair with complementary medicine. Although one in five people suffer from stress and insomnia, many do not want to tell their doctors, as they don't want to have black marks on their medical records. Others are worried about the stigma of taking antidepressants, while others worry that they might develop an addiction to pharmaceutical drugs. For many, complementary medicines are the answer, with consumers attracted by claims of natural goodness.

Edzard Ernst, professor of complementary medicine at Exeter University, said he was not surprised at the increase in sales. "The last time I checked there were 40 million websites promoting complementary medicine, and many herbal medicines do work."

"But homeopathy doesn't work, and that's that," he said. "And unless people are very certain of what they are taking, they could cause more harm than good. Some remedies can interact negatively with prescribed medicines."

While researching his latest book which examines the efficiency of alternative medicine, Ernst said his co-author, Dr Simon Singh, visited ten homeopathic outlets and asked for protection from malaria. "And they all provided some, without exception. They were all very nice, but the nightmare begins when you return home with malaria."