For the viewers of Turkmenistan's popular nightly news programme, Vatan, it was another routine bulletin. But as the newsreader began the 9pm broadcast, viewers across the central Asian country spotted something unusual crawling across the studio table: a large brown cockroach.

The cockroach managed to run the whole way across the desk before disappearing. The programme, complete with cockroach, was repeated at 11pm that night.

It was only at 9am the following day that horrified officials from Turkmenistan's ministry of culture discovered the cockroach's guest appearance. And that, perhaps, should have been the end of the matter. But the consequences of this cockroach's five minutes of fame were immediate and severe.

The country's president, Kurbanguly Berdymukhamedov, took news of the insect so badly that he reacted by sacking 30 workers from the main state TV channel, the news website Kronika Turkmenistan reported yesterday.

Before the cockroach incident, Berdymukhamedov had instructed Turkmenistan's minister of culture, Gulmurat Muradov, to modernize the country's TV channel. However, a new ministerial committee set up to carry out this task only worked 9am to 6pm. This allowed the cockroach to run around undetected.

Berdymukhamedov became leader of the oil-rich former Soviet republic in December 2006. The previous president, Saparmurat Niyazov, sacked several TV executives after drunken technicians failed to screen his New Year's speech to the nation. They eventually managed to broadcast the bulletin at 3am.

Those sacked in the cockroach incident included journalists, directors, camera operators, and technical staff. Nobody from the Turkmen embassy in Moscow was available for comment.

Berdymukhamedov is trying to improve relations with the west, and has begun a series of mild liberal reforms at home. He has announced the opening of Internet cafes in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan's capital, and reintroduced foreign languages to the school curriculum.

Last March the president restored pensions to more than 100,000 elderly citizens and in January he reversed another of his predecessor's more bizarre bans ? on opera and ballet performances.

"Our flourishing nation should not stand separate from the world," Berdymukhamedov said. He added: "It absolutely should have a worthy operatic theatre and a worthy state theatre."

Berdymukhamedov wants to end Turkmenistan's isolation from the rest of the world in other ways too. He has overseen ideas to attract larger numbers of foreign tourists to Turkmenistan, including the building of a multibillion pound tourist resort on the Caspian Sea. The president has also visited Washington.

Berdymukhamedov's dislike of cockroaches may have something to do with his previous career as a dentist. He graduated from Turkmenistan's state medical institute in 1979, completing a PhD in medical sciences in Moscow, and then worked as a dentist from 1980 to 1995. In December 1997 he was appointed minister for health.