Prince Charles is the heir to the throne of the United Kingdom. He is also a businessman and a champion of the environment. And now he is probably also Britain's poshest greengrocer. Charles has opened a store called Highgrove (the name of his country house) on the main high street of the local town, Tetbury. It is the prince's latest venture in his growing business portfolio, which has earned millions of pounds in profit over the last few years.

At the Highgrove shop, the prince will sell everything from seasonal vegetables freshly pulled out of the ground from the prince's nearby estate to apple juice from his wife Camilla's orchards in Wiltshire. There will be jams, jellies, honeys, chutneys and mustards, as well as handmade biscuits and chocolates. But the thousands of visitors, tourists and shoppers that will come to his store should not expect a bargain. 

Away from the food shelves, a Highland Vase marking the prince's 60th birthday later this year was on sale for an amazing GBP395. You could spend GBP30 on a pair of gardening gloves or GBP45 on a bird box. The best buy may be a collection of Prince Charles's drawings for just GBP6.95.

A small crowd turned up for the official opening. There was no cutting of ribbon, no toasts, just an appearance by Charles and Camilla. The royal couple had a chat with the staff, met prominent local people and, no doubt, checked the stock was all in order. "He doesn't exactly look like a shopkeeper, does he?" said Steve Gray, one of the onlookers. "Why is he doing this? He doesn't need the money and it seems a bit strange, a member of the royal family running a shop."
 
Cynics might say the prince is doing it to promote the Prince Charles brand name. There have been rumours that Highgrove in Tetbury is the first one of a chain of stores. Members of Charles's staff said that this was nonsense ? but they did admit that he was thinking of exporting some of his goodies. 

According to the advance publicity, the shop is about reflecting Charles's interests. So the first displays that the visitor sees are chinaware and stationery designed by a student at the prince's School of Traditional Arts in East London. And the wooden boxes that the chutneys are stored in are made from sustainable Welsh oak by disadvantaged people being taught skills through one of the projects supported by the prince. But the highlight is probably the organic vegetables. There is no greengrocer in Tetbury so the people of the town are very excited that they will be able to buy Charles's muddy vegetables at his new store. 

Sarah Champier-Lowe, the prince's personal florist and in charge of making sure the vegetables looked good said: "When we had a preview, people couldn't wait to get at the vegetables." In truth, the vegetable prices were not particularly expensive. A bunch of organic leeks from Highgrove will cost GBP1.35 today. A similar bunch of leeks from the Netherlands which didn't look as tasty as Charles's was GBP1.10 in the supermarket opposite.

Anyway, the prince's staff said, the profits of the shop will go to the prince's Charities Foundation, which manages the money generated by his social enterprises. Most Tetbury shopkeepers welcomed the new business. A few metres from Charles's shop, David Herbert, of the food and drinks store, Quayles, said: "Everybody has been telling me my business is going to suffer. It's not - it's good for the town. We'll all benefit. The shop will attract more visitors." Chocolate shop owner Hortensia Oates had checked out the prices Charles was charging. "I've got to admit his prices are quite competitive," she said.

Butcher John Newman sells beef from Charles's estate. "This will bring more people into the town so that's good for us." The shopkeepers don't want to criticize their royal neighbour - this is a royalist town. As they left the store yesterday, Camilla shook hands with onlookers - and recommended the shop. "It's got some lovely things in," she said. 

The prince was busy checking out a new rival, the Chef's Table. "I hear it's good," he told one Tetbury resident. "Not as good as your shop," she replied. In places like this, it is best to be on the right side of the royals.
