The capital city of Venezuela, Caracas, has some of the worst traffic jams in the world. The situation is so bad that psychiatrists have now begun to give advice to commuters about what to do when they are in a traffic jam. The advice includes the following: eat a snack, read a book, do a crossword, listen to music but don't punch or shoot anyone.

The number of car owners in Caracas has increased dramatically and the result of this has been blocked motorways and side-streets that are jammed from early morning until late at night. Entire districts are paralysed and the situation is driving some motorists crazy. Doctors say the stress is causing both physical and mental damage and is leading to more cases of road rage, including shoot-outs.

People who try to avoid the traffic jams by leaving home at 5 a.m. have been warned that they may suffer from lack of sleep, which will reduce productivity, make them irritable and have a negative effect on their sex lives.

People are feeling more and more anxious and tense, Robert Lespinasse, the former head of the Venezuelan Society of Psychiatry, told the daily newspaper Ultimas Noticias. A psychologist, Hernan D'Oliveira, said that the disruption in mental processes was making people less open to criticism. Armed motorcycle gangs who attack and rob stationary motorists in broad daylight do not help the situation.

With no obvious solution, people have been advised that when they are sitting in a traffic jam they should have a drink or something to eat and occupy their minds with music, a book, newspaperor crossword.

The rapid increase in vehicle ownership in Venezuelais the result of huge profits from the sale of Venezuelan oil. Last year car sales doubled to 300,000. There are no new roads so the extra traffic streams into potholed streets that have been neglected for years.

Caracas lies in a long narrow valley between skyscrapers and shanty towns. In the hot tropical sun it can appear to be the site of a battle against both geography and climate.

The government, with plenty of money from the sale of oil, has started a programme of building bridges and metro lines before next month's presidential election, but many of these are unfinished, including a bridge connecting Caracas to the airport, which means that drivers have to take detours through hillside barrios that can turn the 16-mile trip into a five-hour nightmare.

Everyone agrees that the traffic jams are getting worse every month. Taxi drivers say their income has fallen dramatically because they are down from an average of five to three fares a day. "It's impossible. If someone asks to go into especially heavy traffic I say no because it will take up half my day," said Fredy Afanador, a local taxi driver.

President Hugo Chavez has criticised former infrastructure ministers but has praised the present minister for doing a good job. He is also looking abroad for help. In return for cheap fuel for London buses, the mayor of London, Ken Livingstone, will share his ideas on congestion charging and other policies in an attempt to solve the problem of traffic jams in Caracas.

