There are not many international aid agencies remaining in Iraq. The few agencies which still remain are now thinking of leaving after four aid workers were kidnapped last week. The aid workers, including two Italian women, were kidnapped from their headquarters in Baghdad. Jean-Dominique Bunel said some aid workers had already left as a result of this kidnapping and others were planning to leave very soon.

Mr Bunel said: "Most international non-governmental organisations are preparing to leave Iraq and some expatriate staff have already left. More will leave soon." He said he did not know who had kidnapped the Italians, who work for an organisation called Bridge to Baghdad, which helps Iraqi children.

An Iraqi group called Ansar al-Zawahri said it had kidnapped the women. In a message on an Islamist website, it said: "This is the first of our attacks against Italy." The name, which means Partisans of Zawahri, might be a reference to Osama bin Laden's deputy Ayman al-Zawahri. 

The security situation in Iraq is getting worse and almost all the main aid organisations, including the United Nations, the International Red Cross and Medecins sans Frontieres have now left the country. Those agencies that have stayed now have to reassess the situation because of the nature of the latest kidnapping. Twenty gunmen burst into the organisation's office in central Baghdad and kidnapped the aid workers. This was a change in strategy by the kidnappers, who have not attacked aid workers or women before, with the exception of one Japanese woman, who was kidnapped earlier this year. 

The Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, asked opposition leaders to unite with his party in the crisis. He said he was "aghast and flabbergasted" that the kidnappers had attacked women because "the Islamic religion says that women are sacred". Opposition leaders repeated that they were against the war in Iraq and the presence of Italian soldiers there, but said that the most important thing now was to save the hostages. 

The kidnapping in Baghdad happened 10 days after the murder of the Italian journalist Enzo Baldoni, who was kidnapped while travelling to Najaf with the Italian Red Cross. Italy had refused to accept the kidnappers' demands for its troops to leave Iraq. On Monday a different militant group released a video of a hostage having his head cut off. The tape, from a group called Tawhid and Jihad, a group that may have links with the Jordanian al-Qaida militant Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, showed Durmus Kumdereli, a Turkish lorry driver. Mr Kumdereli was kidnapped while delivering goods to a US base in Mosul. He said that other transport companies and drivers should not help the occupying forces. Masked men then cut his head off. 

On Tuesday the Australian prime minister, John Howard, said he would not withdraw troops from Iraq after militants said they had kidnapped two Australian hostages. 

