South Africa's most famous mass murderer drinks some coffee, sits back in his chair and pauses when he is asked if it is true that he shot more than 100 black people. "I can't argue with that," says Louis Van Schoor. "I never kept count." Seated at a restaurant terrace in East London, a seaside town in the Eastern Cape, the former security guard looks confident as he relaxes in the sunshine and thinks about his days as an apartheid folk hero.

In the 1980s, he was hired to protect businesses owned by white people. He is thought to have shot 101 people, killing 39, in the course of three years. Some were burglars; others were passersby. All were black or coloured, the term for those of mixed race. Convicted of murder but released from jail after 12 years, Van Schoor does not regret his actions. "I was doing my job - I was paid to protect property. I never apologised for what I did."
 
He is not the only one. According to black clerics and politicians, whites in general have never apologised for what happened during the apartheid regime. This unwillingness to admit past sins is revealed in a book published last month, The Colour of Murder, by Heidi Holland, which investigates the cruel actions of Van Schoor and also his daughter, Sabrina, who hired a hitman to murder her mother. "The story is of a family but it is also the story of a divided country and of the people of that country trying to find new ways to live with each other," says Holland. 

Magistrates and the police, grateful for the terror he instilled in black people, covered his tracks until local journalists and human rights campaigners revealed his actions when apartheid started coming to an end. During his 1992 trial white residents displayed "I Love Louis" stickers decorated with three bullet holes through a bleeding heart. People still feel sympathy for him. "The reaction is 90% positive. Strangers say, 'Hey, it's good to see you,'" says Van Schoor.

Van Schoor was convicted of seven murders and two attempted murders. Since his release two years ago, after benefiting from a sentence reduction for all convicts issued by Nelson Mandela when he was president, Van Schoor, 55, has slimmed down, shaved off his beard and kept a low profile, working as a cattle farm foreman outside East London. 

When he was released in 2004, Van Schoor said he had found God and expressed sorrow to the relatives of his victims. "I apologise if any of my actions caused them hurt." In an interview last week, he tried to clarify his position. "I never apologised for what I did. I apologised for any hurt or pain that I caused through my actions during the course of my work." 

Thanks to his changed appearance and low profile, he has faced no revenge. Few black people recognise him, including the bookseller who took his order for The Colour of Murder. When Van Schoor gave his name, she realised who he was. "She nearly fell off her chair," he says, smiling. 

Married four times and now engaged once more to a local woman, Van Schoor, says he is "happy and content". But he does not seem to approve of the new South Africa. "Everything has changed - people's attitudes, the service in shops, it's not the same." On the contrary, say black leaders, one crucial thing has stayed the same: the whites still won't admit past sins. 

Van Schoor's killings were made possible by a white establishment that did not react as his victims increased. Many of them were poor children such as Liefie Peters, 13, who was shot while hiding in the toilet of a Wimpy restaurant after breaking in to steal cash. Eating a burger yards from where Van Schoor killed the teenage boy, Jacques Durandt, a 33-year-old white former member of the security forces, defended the killer. "I won't say he's a murderer. For him it was a job."
 
East London does have at least one white supporter of racial harmony: Van Schoor's daughter, Sabrina, 25. While her father was in jail she shocked the white community by dating black men and giving birth to a mixed-race child. In 2002, she hired a black man to kill her mother, claiming she was a racist. Convicted of murder and sent to the same prison as her father, Sabrina Van Schoor is seen as a martyr by some black people. She seems popular among fellow inmates at Fort Glamorgan jail. "That girl, she's not like the whites outside of here. She's OK," says one inmate. 

Speaking through iron bars, Sabrina Van Schoor, powerfully built like her father, says she is nervous that everyone will start talking about her family again because of the book. "I'm afraid it might open old wounds."