A baby born in America this week took the population of the USA to 300 million. It's highly possible that the baby was the child of a Latin American immigrant, perhaps in Los Angeles. In 1967 Life magazine identified the 200 millionth American as Robert Ken Woo, a fourth-generation Chinese-American from Atlanta. That was simply a guess too. But this story has some substance. America has reached a milestone in its population growth and this is making people reflect in the same way they do on major birthdays or anniversaries.
 
The US census bureau calculates that one American is born every seven seconds, one dies every 13 seconds, and an immigrant arrives (net) every 31 seconds. Add those together and you get a net population gain of one person every 11 seconds. Over the past 100 years the US has seen the largest population growth in its history. And this trend will probably continue through this century, though the rate of growth is expected to stop rising around the year 2070. The population increased from 200 to 300 million in just 39 years and it is expected that the population will reach 400 million in just 37 years time. 

Apart from the increase in population, the composition of America, its human make-up, and even its culture and lifestyles, are changing dramatically. The first major change is where Americans live. The main population centres are slowly moving from the northeast to the south and west. The fastest-growing states are Nevada, Arizona and Texas. The population is not evenly spread across America either. More than half live in 10 of the 50 states, most of them along the coasts. 

William Frey, a population expert at the Brookings Institution in Washington, said the US was now moving towards a new sunbelt beyond Florida, Texas and California. "As the coastal areas become crowded, people have started to move further inland to places like Arizona, Nevada, Georgia and Tennessee." The other side of this trend is that the Great Plains, the cultural symbol of cowboy America, is becoming increasingly a myth. The mid-western states are emptying as the population moves to the big cities. In the past 100 years the proportion of Americans living in urban and suburban areas has doubled to 80%. The idea of the "frontier", of existence under an open sky, still exists in movies, but fewer and fewer people live in such places. 

Population change is also having an impact on the environment. According to the Centre for Environment and Population, an independent research body, the main effects of a growing population are felt around the urban areas and are increased by Americans' belief that bigger equals better. "When I travel abroad and come back, I'm always shocked by the consumption here. Cars are bigger, people travel further distances, they build bigger houses," the centre's director, Victoria Markham, said. It is often said that the US has 5% of the world's population but uses 25% of its energy. A less known fact is that each American now occupies about 20% more land for housing, schools, shops, roads and so on than he or she did 20 years ago. Almost 1,214 hectares of farmland are covered in concrete every day, and the rate is increasing. 

This brings us to the most controversial change: America's ethnic composition and the role of immigration. In 1970 the newly immigrant proportion of the American people was 5%. Today it is 12.1% and rising. The largest single national group of immigrants is Mexican, and the largest ethnic group Hispanic. By 2050 the census bureau believes that the proportion of non-Hispanic whites will have fallen from 69% in 2000 to about 50%, Hispanics will have doubled to 24%, Asians also to 8%, while the proportion of African-Americans will increase slightly to 14%. For Mr Frey, the rise of the Hispanic community, with their younger average ages and higher birth-rates, will help to stop the decline in a rapidly ageing white population. For Roy Beck, president of Numbers USA, a research group focusing on immigration, the long-term increase is entirely the result of immigration. "If we had zero net immigration we would never have reached 300 million; the population would be about 245 million today." The result, he says, is more congestion, more restrictions and the decline of individualism, freedom and space. In short, America is turning into Europe.

