Wildlife crime investigators working with an international animal charity say that thousands of endangered animals, which are supposed to be protected by law, are being bought and sold openly on the internet.
 
The investigators looked at nearly 100 websites based around the world and found a "shocking" selection of rare and endangered animals for sale. They included a Siberian tiger ($70,000), a young gorilla ($8,100) advertised as being in London, and other rare monkeys, birds, seahorses and whole turtle shells. One of the most expensive was a "sweet-natured" two-year-old giraffe being sold for $15,500 in the US. "He has never been bad-tempered with me. A loving home is a must," said the anonymous owner. The internet has revolutionised shopping for books, DVDs and airline tickets, but it has also opened up great opportunities to deal in illegal wildlife which, according to the United Nations, is worth billions of dollars a year and is now almost as big as the arms and drug trades. "Within one week we found over 9,000 wild animal products and specimens, and wild animals for sale, mainly from species protected by law," says the report for the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW). "More than 100 traders were identified, each advertising an unnamed, unspecified number of items," said the authors of the report. 

There were enough endangered animals for sale to stock whole zoos, and the parts of dead animals found on the web would have stocked hundreds of Chinese pharmacies. "They included some of the world's most endangered species," the report says. "There were live Amazonian parrots, wild cats, a green turtle which the seller said was taken from a Southeast Asian rainforest; even a live pet lion." A total of 146 live apes were found in a week, and some were being advertised before they were even born. The commercial buying and selling of apes and monkeys is either illegal or subject to strict controls. The gorilla for sale in London probably did not exist, said an IFAW spokeswoman on Monday. "It was possibly a Congo-based operation which would capture an animal when someone ordered one." Some of the animals were definitely real, however, including rare turtle shells, clothes made from the Tibetan antelope and stuffed lions and rare birds, which were all found, along with a stuffed polar bear that was advertised as being Victorian but looked quite new.

Although thousands of species are endangered all over the world, the sellers do not seem to have a problem finding animals to sell. IFAW says that the sellers range from individuals hoping to make money by selling a single exotic pet to professional traders who seem to have access to a regular supply. The sellers do not seem worried by the fact that it is illegal to buy and sell endangered animals. Many of them seem to be unaware that the law exists. 

