I first met Thomas last spring, when I asked him to write an article about living secretly in Britain. He had applied for asylum, afraid for his life in Zimbabwe because Robert Mugabe's youth militia, the Green Bombers, threatened to kill him for leaving their organisation.

Now, months later, he looks more relaxed, living with his new partner, Tanya, in a village in East Anglia. But it has been a long, hard journey surviving as an unwanted visitor in Britain. And it is not over yet. 

After his final appeal for asylum was rejected in 2004, Thomas lived rough in Manchester; on friends' floors and in an empty factory with other failed asylum seekers. One night, five white youths attacked and injured him badly. But he wouldn't go to the police. "I was terrified that they would send me back to Zimbabwe."
 
Frightened by the attack, he went to Glasgow to stay with friends, but an old illness forced him to go to hospital. He was afraid to give his real name, so he didn't attend his check-up, went back to Manchester and slept in the bus station. The next day Refugee Action ? the charity that had helped him with his asylum case ? sent him to a homeless hostel in Liverpool, because hostels in Manchester can't take people like Thomas without government support. "It was a huge room full of drug addicts," says Thomas. "Five o'clock, they gave me dinner, and six o'clock you had to be in bed. I was scared of the other residents. They made racist jokes. I couldn't sleep all night. The next morning I took the first bus back to Manchester." He spent his second night in the bus station before another friend let him stay.
 
At this time, the asylum and immigration tribunal decided that Zimbabweans would be in danger if they were sent home, so Thomas reapplied for asylum. But his claim was rejected. His case worker at Refugee Action appealed, and Thomas attended an appeal hearing in London. 

He won the appeal, and returned to Manchester expecting to move into a hostel and receive government food vouchers, instead of depending on friends and charity, but nothing arrived for another two months. Three days before Christmas, he was finally given a room in a National Asylum Support Service [Nass] hostel. But it was horrible. "My bedroom floor was covered in water, the kitchen ceiling leaked, there was mould growing everywhere." And the first food vouchers didn't arrive until Christmas Eve, when the only supermarkets that accepted them were closed. "I spent Christmas Day ill with hunger," he says. 

But in the new year, life improved: Thomas was transferred to a better Nass hostel, and then he heard that his sister, who he hadn't seen for three years since escaping from Zimbabwe, was living in the Midlands! "I couldn't believe it," he says. "She had left the same night as myself, after the Green Bombers had beaten me up in front of my family. None of us had heard from her." 

He remembered Sonia as a big woman. Now 43, also a failed asylum seeker, she was tiny. "We hated each other when I was growing up," Thomas laughs. "But now I just wanted to be with her. She is the only family I have here." 

He has one brother still in Zimbabwe and another who died last year. Another brother and two other sisters are in South Africa, where his mother now lives, too. Her house in Zimbabwe was destroyed by Mugabe's so-called slum clearance programme. 

Thomas met Tanya through a friend of Sonia's, and they liked each other immediately. She invited Thomas to move in with her and her four young children. With Tanya at work all day, Thomas became a house husband. "It's the happiest I have ever been," he smiles, holding Tanya's hand. They plan to marry when Thomas has his refugee status. "I don't want anyone to think we are only getting married so I can stay," he insists. "She's been there for me, more than anyone else in my life. She took me in when I had nothing."
 
Thomas wants to support his new family, but asylum seekers are not allowed to work. Five months on, the Home Office has told him nothing about his case, and this makes him nervous. "It's not knowing what is going on that is stressful," he says. In April, the government obtained permission to send failed asylum seekers back to Zimbabwe, allowing it to deport up to 7,000 people. 

What will he do if the Home Office does deport failed asylum seekers to Zimbabwe? Thomas says: "It's harder now. I have a family here, but I'll have to go underground again. No way am I going back." And Tanya? Without hesitation, she replies: "I'll go wherever he is."
