Naomi Campbell's day began along familiar lines yesterday. The supermodel was chauffeur-driven in a black SUV with dark windows, surrounded by her bodyguards. Reaching the venue, she strolled elegantly past a long line of press photographers shouting, "Naomi, over here!" before entering the building and changing into her costume.

And then it all went wrong. Where were the assistants to help her put on her clothes? Where were the makeup artists, the lighting experts and the dressmakers? Where, for heaven's sake, was the Vogue editor Anna Wintour? 

The only people in sight were a few confused-looking garbage collectors, real ones that is, not actors dressed up as garbage collectors to make fashion shoots look more interesting. Ms Campbell, 36, had just begun a week-long exercise in seeing how the other half lived, thanks to the New York punishment system. 

She was the guest of the city's sanitation department and will spend each day this week, from 8am to 4pm, at its warehouse in downtown Manhattan on the edge of the East River. The community service, along with a fine of $185 and a two-day anger management course, was her punishment for throwing a mobile phone at her housemaid, Ana Scolavino, who needed four stitches to the head. 

For a celebrity who has suffered a lot of bad press over the incident a year ago, Ms Campbell managed her entry to the warehouse at Pier 36 very calmly. She wore six-inch stiletto heels - believed to be Christian Louboutin, with their characteristic red soles - brown leggings, a black coat and hat, and sunglasses. 
The perfect finishing touch was a pair of calf-high black combat boots, covered with scratch marks, hanging casually over her shoulder. How many hundred dollars did it cost to buy them, and how many hours of careful attention did it take to make them look so old? 

Inside the warehouse, and out of the reach of press lenses, Ms Campbell changed into her boots and put on the uniform gloves, dust mask and fluorescent safety vest. Then she was given her tasks for the day, when she must have realized how horrible her punishment was going to be.

Albert Durrell, a sanitation department deputy chief, explained that she would be asked to sweep and wash the warehouse floor, the locker rooms and windows. And yes, he said, "If they are dirty, she will be cleaning toilets." 

The one thing she won't have to suffer is heavy attention from the press. The judge at her trial agreed she could stay indoors all week, partly because of the crowds of press photographers that followed the pop star / DJ Boy George when he did community service on the street at the same station last summer.
 
"Let me make this clear," Mr Durrell said. "This programme has been in Manhattan for over a year now. We've had a couple of celebrities, but the basic rule is treat everyone with respect and dignity. They have a job to do and they perform well at it. So far so good, we haven't had any problems."
 
If Ms Campbell, or any of the three other offenders doing community service with her this week, failed to do what they were told, he added, they would be straight back in front of a judge. 

The area may at least remind Ms Campbell of her early life in Streatham, an area of south London quite like this concrete-rich neighbourhood of Manhattan. Pier 36 is opposite a line of red-brickÅ@tower blocks. Running above the warehouse is one of New York's busiest main roads, Franklin D Roosevelt Drive, whose greyness is a great contrast to its name. 

At the entrance to the compound are signs warning "No trespassing, violators will be prosecuted". It's hard to imagine Ms Campbell enjoying the experience so much that she would want to break her way back inside when she has finished her sentence!

What Ms Campbell learns from her stay under the bridge - whether, in particular, she becomes more sympathetic to the people who work in her house - remains to be seen. If nothing else, she may begin to respect the men and women who, up until this week, have kept the New York garbage out of her sight. 

