To Oprah Winfrey, Nelson Mandela and others who gave millions of dollars to help South African orphans and street children, the woman who cared for them was the "Angel of Soweto". The children she helped knew her simply as Mama Jackie.

The children had horrific stories to tell. Their parents had been murdered. They had to work as prostitutes to feed their younger brothers and sisters. When they heard these terrible stories, many people gave large amounts of money to Jackie Maarohanye and her Ithuteng Trust school to provide shelter and an education to thousands of traumatised and destitute children. The money came from famous donors such as Winfrey, who wrote a cheque for $1m during a visit to the school last year, and organisations including the US National Basketball Association. "I think Mama Jackie is a living angel on earth," said Winfrey. 

But now the school's gates are locked and Winfrey, America's most influential talk show host, along with Mr Mandela and Bill Clinton, has requested copies of a South African television documentary that claims Ms Maarohanye pressurised pupils into making up stories about murdered parents and poverty in order to raise money. The film also claims that donations to educate children went missing while students went hungry. 

The investigative TV programme Carte Blanche showed that pupils who said they had seen their parents killed are now living with them, and that those who said they had been saved from the streets never left home. One of a group of 45 children from the Ithuteng school who travelled to the US five years ago as guests of Bill and Hillary Clinton said they were made to appear before the United Nations and recite false stories about the hardship they had suffered. "We went to the United Nations and [Ms Maarohanye] said that today you better cry seriously ... you better cry more than the other days you have been crying," said the unidentified student. 

Carte Blanche filmed at the school five years ago and went back to talk to some of the same children. Many said their original stories were not true. Lebogang Makheta said in 2001 that both her parents had been murdered in political violence. "My mother was killed by a spear and my father was shot dead," she said at the time. Now Lebogang says that was a lie. 

"I spoke to Mama Jackie and she told me that whatever they ask me, I must say it the way she wrote down because it would help us get sponsors who would give us money," she said. "I told myself I was just doing to get sponsors and to get help with our scholarships." She also told the programme in 2001 that she was involved with drugs and gangsters. "None of that was true. It was all lies, just lies," she now says. 
Lebogang's mother, Phyllis Makheta, went to a fundraising function at the school and was surprised to discover that her daughter was supposed to be an orphan. "I was there in the school. I don't understand English very well, but I did ask them, even Jackie, why these children are crying and saying they are orphans, but we [their parents] are here. She said: 'Don't worry, it is a play.'"

Five years ago Lindiwe Thusi told Carte Blanche that she saw her father's body with his head cut off. She now says: "Mama Jackie gave us a script with those words written on it." When different people came we had to get ready and start crying and tell that whole story," she told Carte Blanche. Lindiwe says her father is alive and in the army. She also said that her earlier claim that she worked as a prostitute to feed her sisters was not true.

Ms Maarohanye has refused to comment but she told Carte Blanche that the accusations against her were a "smear campaign" by disgruntled former pupils. However, she was unable to explain how it was that she told the media Lebogang Makheta's parents had been murdered or that Lindiwe Thusi's father had been brutally killed. She said no student was ever forced to repeat false stories. "I never pushed a child. I have never put a gun on a child's neck. I have never strangled a child. I have never said if you don't go, this is what I am going to do. I have never done that. You can never prove that I have done that."

The children's stories brought numerous donations from around the world. Some of the money was to pay college bursaries. But three years ago some donors, including a large bank and a hotel group, stopped dealing with the Ithuteng Trust after finding out the money was not reaching the students or their colleges. Several former Ithuteng students say they were forced to leave their higher education courses because the donors had stopped paying. A former finance officer at the University of the Western Cape said some students had so little money they had to live on bread. Donors started paying the fees direct to ensure that students were able to graduate.

The chairman of the Ithuteng Trust board, Joseph Kganakga, has described the news as a nightmare that left him angry and disappointed. He has resigned from the board, along with two other board members who said they had lost confidence in Ms Maarohanye.