The Coen brothers' brutal thriller No Country For Old Men dominated the 80th Academy Awards on Sunday, when it won best director and best film.

Javier Bardem won the best supporting actor Oscar for his role as the hitman Anton Chigurh in the same film. Rounding things off on a triumphant night for the film, directors Ethan and Joel Coen also won the Oscar for best adapted screenplay for bringing the work of novelist Cormac McCarthy to the screen.

In a night without many surprises, the heavily-tipped favourite Daniel Day-Lewis won the best actor Oscar for his portrayal of an oil prospector in There Will Be Blood. He accepted his award, on his knees, from Helen Mirren (who won an Oscar in 2006 for her portrayal of the British Queen), remarking that, "that's the closest I'll ever come to getting a knighthood."

There was a British feeling to much of the evening, with six Oscars going to British nominees. The most notable was to Tilda Swinton, who won the award for best actress in a supporting role for her performance in the legal thriller Michael Clayton. Swinton also produced the most noteworthy acceptance speech of the night, noteworthy for its inclusion of the words nipple and buttock in the 45 seconds winners are allowed.

Speaking backstage on the night, Swinton admitted to being surprised at her win. "I'm so excited, I think it's fantastic. It's completely astonishing, and I'm amazed I'm still standing, but I'm not complaining. It's good."

The 80th annual Academy Awards took place in inclement weather and with the writers' strike only just ended. The strike caused the Golden Globes, Hollywood's other major celebration, to be cancelled. As the strike ended less than two weeks before the Academy Awards, it left the show's writers little time to prepare. Jon Stewart, hosting the second most-watched television programme in the US for the second time, opened the show by saying, "You're here! I can't believe it! You're actually here!"

That sense of relief and disbelief continued throughout the rest of the show and much of this year's broadcast was given over to nostalgic reruns of previous wins and interviews with stars and past winners.

One of the evening's biggest surprises came when Marion Cotillard won the best actress award for her portrayal of Edith Piaf in La Vie en Rose. Most people had expected either Julie Christie or Ellen Page to win the award, but Cotillard followed her victory at the BAFTAs (the British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards) by winning the Oscar.

Other British winners included Alexandra Byrne for her costume designs for Elizabeth: The Golden Age, Jan Archibald, along with Didier Lavergne for La Vie en Rose, and Suzie Templeton and Hugh Welchman for the animated short film Peter and the Wolf.

Daniel Day-Lewis was the only winner to use over-the-top sentimental and emotional language when he said during his acceptance speech that There Will be Blood had, "sprung like a golden sapling out of the mad, beautiful head of [director] Paul Thomas Anderson."

But best actress winner Cotillard probably came up with the most touching sentiment of the night when she remarked from the stage that, "It is true, there are some angels in this city."