Ceausescu was shot in December 1989 and communist rule in Romania ended soon after. Now many people in Romania are asking why some of the agents who recruited the child spies continued to work for the security services after Ceausescu died in 1989. "In every Romanian county there were complex networks of these children, aged between 12 and 14," said Cazimir Ionescu, a member of the state council which is studying all the Securitate documents. A Romanian historian, Marius Oprea, found a collection Securitate documents in the Transylvanian town of Sibiu. Ceausescu's son Nicu controlled Sibiu for many years.

"In Sibiu in 1989 the Securitate recruited 830 informers; 170 of them were under the age of 18," Mr Oprea said. "If this was the same all over Romania, you could say that possibly 15% of the informers in the country were children." Historians believe the Securitate had hundreds of thousands of informers by 1989, as Soviet power began to weaken in Eastern Europe. "What kind of information could these children give, except information about their family, teachers, and so on?" Mr Oprea asked. "This shows that, by 1989, the Securitate was controlling its own people."

The children had to tell Securitate agents about their friends' and families' opinions on the Communist party. They also had to tell them if their friends and families listened to western radio stations, had any contacts with foreigners or told jokes about Ceausescu.

"In the 1980s it was difficult for the secret police to recruit informers so they had to blackmail people, even children, with things they had done wrong at school or with things the police knew about them," Mr Oprea said. The secret police were particularly interested in intelligent and sporty children because they were in teams and clubs and had contact with many teachers, other children and their parents.

After 1989 many of those who recruited children got better jobs in the secret police, and some brought their young spies to work with them when they left school. "This is a tragedy which we must tell the public about but we must also punish the people responsible for this situation," said Stejarel Olaru, a historian working with Mr Oprea at the state institute for studying communist crimes.

Mr Oprea first heard about the child-spy programme soon after 1989, but at that time the ex-communists who were in power after the fall of Ceausescu were not interested in his story. Mr Oprea remained silent for 15 years. After the elections of 2004, the old politicians lost power and the Securitate archives were opened up. Romania hopes to join the EU next January and the EU wants Romania to open all the old Securitate archives so the public can see them.