On the outside, Tee was a typical student. Living away from home was expensive, and he had racked up a sizable debt in a short time. Like most students, he had a computer and a phone in his room - but instead of using them to study, he turned them into the tools of a 21st century criminal.

In his short career as a fraudster, Tee - who is trying to rebuild his life after serving a long prison sentence, and agreed to speak anonymously - estimates that he stole as much as GBP250,000 through stolen credit card details, identity theft and bank account takeover. Police officials last week said the volume of online crime was so high that they could not investigate every case, and that big criminals were moving into the fast-growing field. 

For Tee, who served almost four years for conspiracy to defraud, the chance to use people's ignorance against them was just too easy. "Although it sounds really flippant, it wasn't even like a part-time job - because at least in a job you have to work a few hours," he said. "Maybe it took an hour a night if I really felt like it. But to me it felt like a bit of fun and a pastime which developed into an easy way of making money."

In spare moments around his university schedule - he was studying law - the young Yorkshireman would take card details lifted from insecure websites or passed on from other criminals, and embark on spending sprees that got him cars, clothes and cash. Sometimes scant details such as a name and phone number could open the door. "I used to go through different methods depending on how confident I felt," he said. "I used to call people up and pretend to be from a fraud department and just ask them for their details. But sometimes it's as easy as getting information from a local video shop."
 
Now 26, Tee admits that by the time he was caught he was looking into the possibility of getting bank loans and even mortgages using stolen identities. "It was just a game to see how far you could go," he said. "My favourite trick was that you get a card in someone's name and use it. Then, within 24 hours, you call the bank up and convince them that you're the genuine person and that you haven't made those transactions - and they refund it. Then you just go to the cash machine and take it all out again." He even sent flowers to one victim, using their stolen bank details to pay for the bouquet as a cruel gesture of thanks.
 
People like Tee represent the smallest end of what is now a multibillion pound criminal industry. Statistics from Cifas, the UK's fraud prevention service, show that identity theft was up almost 20% last year, while Internet and card fraud rose to an all-time high of GBP414m in 2006.

Martin Gill, a criminologist at the University of Leicester, who has studied the actions and motivations of fraudsters - Tee was one of his interviewees - said the perceived ease of fraud, particularly when using the Internet, was encouraging to those who commit crime. "One of the things that comes through is the belief that they're not going to get caught," he said. Industry insiders say a large number of cases still go unreported because conviction has proved so difficult.

"The common reaction among companies selling goods is a real frustration at how hard it is to prosecute and get convictions for people who commit fraud," said Keith Marsden, managing director of 192.com, which sponsors Prove-ID, a private industrial forum on dealing with fraud. "It's a hard process to go through." Instead, companies are choosing tougher security procedures and programmes to educate the public about safe Internet use.

But experienced fraudsters like Tee say that it is still too easy: even chip and pin, which has drastically cut physical fraud levels, can prove beneficial to the seasoned criminal. "I thought chip and pin was brilliant - now cashiers think they've got no right to look at your card. If I wanted to, I could pretend to be anyone, because nobody will ever check. It's a new opportunity for them."

How to avoid scams
- Never give personal details over the phone. Banks should never ask for pin numbers or codes. 
- Only shop on secure websites that display a padlock or key symbol in your browser. The address should start https instead of http. 
- Only open email attachments if you are entirely sure it is necessary.
- Be wary of suspicious-looking emails. Some viruses use the name of somebody you trust as a disguise.