The English spelling system is 'absolutely awful'. That is the conclusion of new research that has found that children meet 800 words by the age of 11 that hinder their reading because of the way they are spelt.

Monkey, asparagus, spinach, caterpillar, dwarf, banana, handkerchief, soldiers, stomach and telescope have all been included on the long list of words that confuse children because they contain letter combinations that are more commonly pronounced in a different way.

The words have all been identified as problematic for reading, as opposed to writing, because of their 'phonic unreliability', according to the study The Most Costly English Spellings. Masha Bell, who did the research, argued that there were 200 words on the list that could be improved just by dropping 'surplus letters' such as the i in friend or the u in shoulder.

"English is the worst of all the alphabetical languages," said Bell. "It is unique in that there are not just spelling problems but reading problems. They do not exist anywhere else."

Bell argued that the spelling system cost schools money and was the reason for poor literacy results in the UK compared with the rest of Europe. In Finland, where words are usually pronounced as they look, children learn to read fluently within three months, she said. In the UK, academics have found that it takes three years for a child to reach a basic level of reading competence. The tricky spellings make English particularly difficult for children with dyslexia and children from poorer families, whose parents may not read to them very regularly.

In the research Bell gives examples of words that have the same pronunciation but different letter combinations. Examples include to and two; clean and gene; same and aim; day and grey; kite and light; and stole and coal. Then there are those that look similar but sound different with the combinations of 'ea', 'ee' and the letter 'o' causing most trouble. Among the words in this category are eight and height, break and dreamt, and move and post. The letters 'ough' can also be pronounced in a number of different ways.

Simplifying the system would improve literacy, according to Bell, but she said people were resistant to change. "People feel that they have suffered so much at the hands of English spelling that they don't want to look at it," she said. But other countries have made changes. Last month the parliament in Portugal, where the spelling system is also thought to be complicated, voted to reform and simplify it.

"In 1928 the Turks changed their whole alphabet from Arabic to Latin," said John Wells, professor of phonetics at University College London and president of the Spelling Society. "It happened in the Soviet Union." In Germany there were changes made in the 1990s to make the writing system more regular. English has also developed with words such as olde and worlde dropping the e.

Wells wants to see things change again and says there are two possible approaches. The first would be to simplify the way in which words are spelt and then allow people to choose whether to use the new or old system, while the second approach would involve a complete change. "The Spelling Society is in favour of the first approach," he said.

Chris Davis, spokesman for the National Primary Headteachers' Association, said the spelling system had a major effect on children's literacy progress: "It definitely slows English children down. In international comparisons, languages that are phonetically uniform always come top." But he said that teachers would be unwilling to see things change. "It would be such a big change that people would find it very difficult to even consider it," he said.

"There are already problems because of the different spelling system in America, but people would also be against using American spelling. I think it is a question of ownership, that it is our language." Davis argued that people felt spelling was linked to the origin of words.