Scientists are warning that over-fishing and the practice of catching sharks for their fins, known as 'finning', are reducing shark populations rapidly. Nine more species of shark will soon be added to the list of endangered species. The scalloped hammerhead shark, whose numbers have fallen by 99% over the past 30 years in some parts of the world, is particularly at risk and will be declared globally endangered on the World Conservation Union (IUCN) list.

"Sharks are definitely at the top of the list for marine fishes that could go extinct in our lifetimes," said Julia Baum of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in California and a member of IUCN shark specialist group. "If we carry on the way that we are, we're looking at a really high risk of extinction for some of these shark species within the next few decades." 

At the American Association for the Advancement of Science annual meeting in Boston, Baum said that in addition to the scalloped hammerhead, other shark species that will be added to the IUCN endangered list later this year are the smooth hammerhead, short-fin mako, common thresher, big-eye thresher, silky, tiger, bull and dusky. There are already 126 species of shark on the IUCN's list.

"People think that worldwide species can't become endangered because if they are threatened in one area, surely they'll be fine in another area," said Baum. "But fisheries now cover all corners of the earth and the fishing is so intensive that these species are in danger everywhere."

Recent studies have shown that all shark populations in the north-west Atlantic Ocean have fallen by an average of 50% since the early 1970s. Numbers of sharks can fall very quickly because they take a long time to mature - 16 years in the case of a scalloped hammerhead. Their fins are highly prized in China and can sell for as much as GBP140 a kilogram. Until recently only the rich ate shark fin in China, said Baum, but in the last 25 years the country's middle class has grown and so has the market for shark fins. Intensive fishing has caused a 90% fall in shark populations in the oceans of the world and up to 99% along the US east coast, which are some of the best-managed waters in the world, according to Baum.

A fall in numbers of predators such as sharks can have devastating consequences for the local marine ecology. In a case study published last year, Baum found that a major fall in the numbers of predatory sharks in the north Atlantic after 2000 had allowed populations of the sharks' prey, cownose rays, to explode. In turn the rays destroyed the bay scallop populations around North Carolina. "There was a fishery for bay scallops in North Carolina that lasted over a century but it closed down in 2004 because of cownose rays."

There are no restrictions on fishing for sharks in international waters, but Baum supports a recent UN resolution calling for immediate limits on catching sharks and a ban on shark finning. Sonja Fordham, of the Shark Alliance, a coalition of 50 scientific and conservation groups, said: "People think these wide-ranging, fast sharks are not affected by fishing but this shows this is not the case. Worried citizens can really help by making their fisheries ministers aware that they support conservation measures such as limits on catches."

Some conservation efforts for sharks will focus on newly identified hotspots where sharks gather during migrations. Peter Klimley of the University of California found that scalloped hammerhead sharks migrate along fixed 'superhighways' in the oceans, speeding between a series of sites near coastal islands from Mexico to Ecuador. "Hammerhead sharks are not evenly spread throughout the seas, but concentrated at underwater mountains and offshore islands," he said. "So, enforcing reserves around these areas will help to protect these species and will provide the public with places where they can view sharks in their natural habitat."

One site between Hawaii and Mexico attracts so many sharks that scientists call it 'the white shark cafe', Klimley says. "We started calling it the cafe because that is where you might go to have a snack or maybe just to 'see and be seen'. We are not sure which," said Salvador Jorgensen, a researcher at Stanford University's Hopkins Marine Station. "Once they leave the cafe they return year after year to the same exact spot along the coast, just as people return to a favourite fishing hole."
