It has no radio, no boot, no airbag, no passenger-side mirror and just one long windscreen wiper. And if you want air-conditioning to deal with India's summer heat you'll have to buy the deluxe version. India's Tata Group has just announced the world's cheapest car, the Nano, which will go on sale later this year for 100,000 rupees (GBP1,260) to bring motoring to the country's billion inhabitants. 70-year-old Ratan Tata, the chairman of Tata, believes that the Nano is as important an event in the history of transport as the first powered flight by the Wright brothers, or the first landing on the moon. But environmentalists say the new car could cause a 'nightmare' of terrible pollution and blocked roads.

Like a modern-day version of Henry Ford, Tata's idea is of a cheap car that is light and simple, but made from high-quality materials. The result is a small vehicle which can just hold five adults. The cheapest model is very basic: its price has been kept low by using more plastic than steel, and using glue to hold the parts together. Rival manufacturers had questioned whether the car would meet safety standards, especially if the company plans to export such models to Europe. Tata officials said the car had been designed so it could be easily strengthened with metal plates to meet tougher safety standards.

First designed four years ago, the Nano has already revolutionized the motor industry. Just a few days before Tata showed the car to the public for the first time, Ford announced it would increase spending by $500m (GBP250m) a year to make India a centre of 'small-car manufacturing'. Last October, Renault said it was considering making a $5,000 car in India for export to the US. For the time being the Nano will only be on sale in India and analysts predict that India will become the fastest growing car market, overtaking China, in five years.

The 'people's car' is also a realization of the Tata chairman's dream: to put every Indian family in a car. He says the thought came to him first while watching families on motorbikes travelling through dusty streets: "The father driving the scooter, his young kid standing in front of him, his wife seated behind him holding a baby. I wondered whether there could be a safe, cheap, all-weather form of transport for such a family."

The Nano costs just 100,000 rupees plus sales tax and is less than half the price of the next cheapest car on the road in India and a bit more than a quality motorcycle. Analysts say that the economic boom in India means that people with money will want to buy cars instead of motorcycles. If just 10% of motorcycle owners switched to the Nano it would mean 1m extra cars on India's roads a year.

"Tata have been very clever and have studied the market very carefully," said motor industry expert Abdul Majeed. "The Nano is like Ford's Model T which drove the American motor boom in the early 20th century. Tata will give the Indian consumer a cheap car that is easy to drive and cheap to maintain. The market possibilities are huge."

But environmentalists say the possibility of mass sales of the Nano could cause enormous damage to the environment. India's largest cities are now covered in smog and rush hours last long into the night. In Delhi traffic now crawls, on average, at less than nine miles an hour - half the speed of ten years ago. As traffic jams increase and cars slow down, the emissions of greenhouse gases increase more rapidly. India's vehicles produced 219m tonnes of carbon dioxide in 2005. Experts say that will increase by almost 700% to 1,470 tonnes by 2035 if car travel is not restricted.

"In terms of emission controls, we are five to 10 years behind Europe. We do not tax diesel properly so more dirty car use is encouraged," said Sunita Narain of Delhi's Centre for Science and Environment. "We need better public transport, not policies that promote private cars, otherwise we will not meet people's needs."

The motor industry says that Indian car ownership is still small: seven or eight out of every 1,000 people own a car, compared with more than 500 in every 1,000 in America. The number of private cars in India ? about 13m ? is only a little more than half the number of cars in America at the start of the 1930s. But the boom in motoring in India is already changing the shape of the country. Slowly cities are being replaced by distant suburbs. The government is spending GBP35bn on new road projects. Farmland has been given to industry for the factories to build new cars.

In the case of Tata's new car, more than 1,000 acres of fields in West Bengal's Singur district were taken to build the Nano plant. The factory will be able to produce 250,000 cars a year. Thousands of farmers who once grew four crops a year have been evicted to make way for the new factory. Last month Shankar Patra, a 50-year-old farmer who lost his fields to the Tata plant, killed himself. "Without our fields there is no work for us. The village will die," said Patra's 22-year-old son, Pratap. "We have nothing, but the rest of India will have a new car."

