     Many factors influence whether a developing country can look forward to a prosperous future or whether it will be forever doomed to backwardness and poverty. A comparison between Peru and Argentina illustrates this point.
  
   The lofty, snowcapped peaks of the Andes Mountains cover most of Peru. Even the valleys are so high that the air is thin and cold. Where the mountains reach down to the Pacific Ocean, it never rains, and the air is so dry that even wooden tools and cloth made hundreds of years ago are perfectly preserved in the sand.
   
   In contrast, the heartland of Argentina consists of a huge, grassy plain, called the Pampas, where cowboys herd cattle on ranches as large as those in Texas. Where rivers flow into the Atlantic, the capital city sprawls with stately buildings and broad avenues, almost like in Paris.
  
  Wheat fields cover much of the Pampas, whose soil is so rich that it never needs fertilizing. However, Argentina, like America, has trouble finding buyers for all the wheat and beef it produces. The country has almost no coal, iron, or other minerals. Thus it cannot manufacture many things that people need, such as cars, machinery, and clothing, so these items must be imported from other countries.
  
  Peru is very different. There are many small farmers who grow just enough com to feed their families. Other people work on large plantations where coffee, cotton, and sugar cane are produced for export to other countries. The mountains have rich deposits of copper, silver, and lead, and the government has developed some very profitable mines. The Indians who live in the high mountain valleys raise sheep and llamas. The women weave beautiful sweaters and blankets from the wool of the llamas, just as their ancestors did. These weavings eventually find their way to the fashionable boutiques of Europe and the United States where they bring high prices.
  
  Most Peruvians are Indians, descendants of the once proud and mighty Incas. When the Spanish destroyed the Inca empire, the Indians became the poor and oppressed people in their own land. A small group of White plantation owners has ruled the country ever since. They brought with them Christianity and the Spanish language, but the great Indian masses remained outside the Spanish culture. Most of them do not even speak Spanish, and few can read or write.
  
  In Argentina, on the other hand, there are very few Indians today. The streets in the big cities are crowded with busy, energetic people and in the outdoor cafes lively discussions can be heard. In recent years, the newspapers and magazines have been free to publish everything, for the people were finally able to establish a free, democratic government.
Thus, Peru and Argentina may develop very differently in the future.

