   Many factors influence whether a developing country can look forward to a prosperous future or whether it will be forever doomed to backwardness and poverty. A comparison between Peru and Argentina illustrates this point.
  
  The majority of Peruvians are Indians descended from the once proud and mighty Incas. Most are unable to speak Spanish, and few have learned to read or write. The Andes Mountains are riddled with copper, silver, and lead deposits. Extracting the ore has proven to be a profitable venture for the government.
  
  The capital city of Argentina sprawls on a river estuary on the Atlantic Ocean, with stately buildings and broad avenues that rival those of Paris. Only a very small Indian minority lives there today. Argentina, like America, produces more wheat and beef than it can consume or even market abroad. The bustling city streets are crowded with busy, energetic people. In the outdoor cafes animated discussions can be heard.
  
  The towering, snow-encrusted peaks of the Andes Mountains extend over most of Peru. At this altitude, even the valleys are cold, and the air is thin. The Indians are the impoverished and oppressed people in their own land. Since the Spanish conquerors destroyed the Inca empire, a small nucleus of White plantation owners has ruled the country.
  
  Wheat fields cover much of the Argentinian heartland, called the Pampas. The alluvial soil is so rich that fertilization is unnecessary. The Pampas consists of a huge grassy plain, where cowboys herd cattle on vast, Texasstyle ranches. In recent years it has been possible for newspapers and magazines to publish everything. The people finally succeeded in establishing a free, democratic government. The country is not blessed with deposits of coal, iron, or other minerals. Large-scale manufacturing of goods needed by the population is impossible. They must depend on other countries for imports of automobiles, machinery, and clothing.
  
  Sheep and llamas are raised by Indians who live on the high mountain plateaus of Peru. Along with Christianity, the Spaniards tried to impose the Spanish language on the natives. The Indian masses have remained alienated from the Spanish culture. Luscious sweaters and blankets are created by the women from alpaca and wool on their hand looms, just as their ancestors did. The garments eventually make their way to the fashionable boutiques of Europe and the United States where they command high prices.
  
  Where the Andes Mountains thrust downward to the Pacific Ocean, there is no moisture in the air, and even wooden implements and cloth, made hundreds of years ago, are perfectly preserved in the sand. Many Peruvians are small farmers whose families manage to subsist on what they grow. Others are employed on large plantations where coffee, cotton, and sugar cane are produced for export.

Thus, Peru and Argentina may develop very differently in the future.

