	The heart is the hardest-working organ in the body. We rely on a regular blood supply every moment of every day. Any disorder that stops the blood supply is a threat to life. Heart disease is very common. More people are killed every year in the U.S. by heart disease than by any other disease.

	A congenital disease is one that a person is born with. Most babies are born with perfect hearts. In about one in every 200 cases something goes wrong. Sometimes a valve develops the wrong shape. It may be too tight, or fail to close properly. Sometimes a gap is left in the septal wall between the two sides of the heart. This is often called a septal defect. When a baby's heart is badly formed, it cannot work efficiently. The blood does not receive enough oxygen. The baby becomes breathless. The blood cannot get rid of carbon dioxide through the lungs. It becomes purplish, and the baby's skin looks blue. It is now possible to save the lives of many blue babies.

	The disease called rheumatic fever may cause harm to the heart. The disease usually follows a sore throat caused by bacteria called streptococci. The tissues of the heart become inflamed. If it is badly affected, it fails. Usually it recovers, and the results of the damage are seen only years later. The valves of the heart are left with scars. They cannot work properly. This puts a strain on the heart. Eventually it may fail. The effects of the rheumatic fever may take up to twenty or thirty years to appear.

	The blood vessels that extend across the heart and supply it with blood are called the coronary arteries. They are very important. They give the heart the oxygen it needs to carry on working. If they become blocked, parts of the heart muscle will die. The patient has a heart attack, which can be fatal. The blockage of a coronary artery is usually caused by a thrombus, or blood clot. Coronary thrombosis happens when a clot forms in a coronary artery. That is the correct name for a heart attack. In normal arteries, blood does not form clots. In coronary disease, the walls of the blood vessels become lumpy, rough, and narrow. 


	Arrhythmia is an interruption of the heart's normal beat Angina is a sharp pain in the chest which is very similar to that caused by thrombosis. High blood pressure is very common. If untreated, high blood pressure may lead to heart attacks, kidney failure, or other serious problems.  High blood pressure may have no symptoms. A person may not be aware of having it unless the blood pressure is measured.

	Among the new drugs for treating heart disease are a family of compounds called beta blocking drugs, or simply, beta blockers. They lessen the after-effects of heart attacks, can prevent second attacks, and can lower the blood pressure of people who have high blood pressure. Other drugs dissolve the lumps which break off the walls of veins and arteries.

	Heart transplants are used more often than mechanical hearts. In transplant surgery, the healthy heart of someone who has died replaces the heart of the patient. Mechanical devices can be implanted in people's bodies to keep their hearts functioning. The commonly used pacemaker does not heal the diseased heart, but it relieves the symptoms of an irregular heart and keeps a steady beat for normal living. When a heart cannot pump enough blood through the lungs because of poorly functioning valves, the valves can be replaced with artificial ones of plastic and metal. By-pass surgery is used to repair clogged or damaged blood vessels. Doctors use pieces of a patient's own veins, often from the leg, to replace the damaged portions of arteries.

	A substance called cholesterol is known to cause a build-up of fatty substances in the blood vessels, which can lead to heart disease, so doctors stress the importance of a diet low in fats. Salt is known to increase the blood pressure, so a low-salt diet is recommended.



