      It had been just one month since the Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. In the Pacific, American forces were reeling under the blows of a powerful and determined enemy. At home the nation was getting ready for a long and terrible war. President Roosevelt badly needed a new plan to attack the enemy and hasten the end of the war.

      President Roosevelt sat in his office at the White House and studied a letter signed by Dr. Lytle Adams. The letter was only one of hundreds which poured into Washington each day. Many of the letters supported the Presidentís recent declaration of war against Japan. Others were critical. Some wanted to know why the United States had been caught unprepared on that fateful Sunday morning a few weeks earlier. But the letter from Dr. Lytle Adams was so important that its contents would stay classified as a top military secret for nearly 30 years. 

      Dr. Adams had a daring plan to attack the enemy. Like many interesting ideas, Dr. Lytle Adamsí plan was very simple, yet it was based on careful planning. For many years, Dr. Adams had studied the habits of bats. He knew that the four-inch long mammals could carry small firebombs attached to their bodies. ìIf bats bearing small firebombs were released by the millions over Tokyo,î he had written in his letter to President Roosevelt, ìthey would fly into roosting places and set off thousands of fires.î Dr. Adams called this plan to attack the enemy with bats Project X-Ray.

      Once again President Roosevelt read the letter. Then he reached for his telephone. ìGet started on Project X-Ray,î he ordered. 

      Dr. Adamsí theory proved itself in a test one year later, in 1943, when a U.S. Army Corps bomber flew at 10,000 feet (3048 meters) over the clear skies of California. ìTarget dead ahead,î reported the navigator. ìTwo minutes to go.î The airplane droned on. Then the bombardier peered into his Norden bombsight and ordered some course corrections. ìBombs awayî was the order shouted into the intercom. The bombardier pressed the release button and hundreds of bats were dropped over the dummy town. Slowly the lumbering aircraft turned and headed east toward its base. 

      Looking out of his turret from inside the Air Corps bomber, the rear gunner saw no explosions. But later, after the bats bearing firebombs flew into roosting places and set off fires, the dummy town in California burst into flames and burned to the ground. Within minutes the telephone on President Rooseveltís desk rang urgently. ìMr. President,î said an excited voice, ìProject X-Ray was successful.î 

      As it turned out, the United States never did put  Project X-Ray to use since by 1945 the atomic bomb had been perfected and the war was drawing to a close. The daring plan to attack the enemy with bats was stamped ìtop secret,î packed into envelopes, and filed in the Pentagon. Dr. Lytle Adams died in 1972.


