      President Franklin D. Roosevelt sat in his office at the White House and studied a letter signed by Dr. Lytle Adams. It had been just one month since the Japanese had attacked Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. In the Pacific, American forces were reeling under the blows of a powerful and determined enemy. At home the nation was getting ready for a long and terrible war. 

      The letter was only one of hundreds which poured into Washington each day. Many of the letters supported the Presidentís recent declaration of war against Japan. Others were critical. Some wanted to know why the United States had been caught unprepared on that fateful Sunday morning a few weeks earlier. But the letter than remained on the Presidentís desk was so important that its contents would stay classified as a top military secret for nearly 30 years. Once again President Roosevelt read the sheet of white paper. Then he reached for his telephone, ìGet started on Project X-Ray,î he ordered. 

      One year later, in 1943, a U.S. Army Air Corps bomber flew at 10,000 feet (3048 meters) over the skies of California. ìTarget dead ahead,î reported the navigator. ìTwo minutes to go.î The airplane droned on. Then the bombardier peered into his Norden bombsight, ordered some course corrections, and pressed the release button.  ìBombs awayî was the order shouted into the intercom. Slowly the lumbering aircraft turned and headed east toward its base. 

      Looking out of his turret, the rear gunner saw no explosions. But later the dummy town in California burst into flames and burned to the ground. Within minutes the telephone on President Rooseveltís desk rang urgently. ìMr. President,î said an excited voice, ìProject X-Ray was successful.î 

      Like many interesting ideas, Project X-Ray was very simple, yet it was based on careful planning. For many years Dr. Lytle Adams had studied the habits of bats. He knew that the four-inch long mammals could carry small firebombs attached to their bodies. ìIf bats by the millions were released over Tokyo,î he had written in his letter to President Roosevelt, ìthey would fly into roosting places and set off thousands of fires.î In the test a year later, Dr. Adamsí theory proved itself when the U.S. Army bomber dropped hundreds of bats over the dummy town in California. 

      As it turned out, the United States never did put  Project X-Ray to use. By 1945, the atomic bomb had been perfected and the war was drawing to a close. The daring plan to attack the enemy with bats was stamped ìtop secret,î packed into envelopes, and filed in the Pentagon. Dr. Lytle Adams died in 1972.

