	A little raccoon, who was almost tame, lived in an old apple tree. He looked like he had a black mask on his face and six black rings on his tail, which is how all raccoons look.
	In the woods next to the raccoon's tree, was a little house where Mrs. McGinnis lived. 

	Mrs. McGinnis had one cow and two pigs that she fed every day. She took armloads of hay to the cow and pails of corn to the pigs.
      At night the cow and the pigs went to sleep under a tree because Mrs. McGinnis did not have a barn for them.
	Before she went to bed, Mrs. McGinnis would always put a slice of bread on the doorstep of her house for the raccoon.
	One night when Mrs. McGinnis was standing in front of her house, she looked up and saw a star.
   	That's the first star I have seen tonight. she said. People say that if you make a wish on the first star you see, it will come true. I will make a wish.
   	She looked up at the star and said. I wish for a little barn for my cow and pigs. After Mrs. McGinnis made her wish, she put a slice of bread on her doorstep for the raccoon. Then she went to bed.
	
	After Mrs. McGinnis had gone to bed, the raccoon began to look for food. The first thing he saw was the bread Mrs. McGinnis left on the doorstep. He came down from his tree and picked up the bread that Mrs. McGinnis left.
	He took the bread into the woods and stopped at a river. Beside the river he swished the bread in the water, because that is what a raccoon does with his food. When the bread was wet, he ate it.
	Because he was still hungry, the raccoon started to look for something more to eat. Just as he started to look, he heard something coming down the road. He saw that it was two men on their horses. Because wild animals are
afraid of people. the raccoon hid in back of a tree.

	The men got down from their horses and started talking about their plan.
	The first man said, Mrs. McGinnis does not live far from here. We will leave our horses here, and go to Mrs. McGinnis' house very quietly. We will steal her cow and pigs. She will not know they are gone until morning.
	The men put black masks over their faces so no one would know who they were and started down the road. When the raccoon thought it
was safe, he went down the same road to look for food. The men made no noise. When they reached Mrs. McGinnis' house, they stole the cow and the pigs and started back through the woods.
	Soon the men began to hear noises. The first noise was made by the raccoon who stepped on a small branch. The branch broke with a CRACK.
   	What was that noise? asked the first man, who was afraid they would be caught. 
   	I don't know,  said the other man. Maybe it was just a little animal playing. 
   	The second noise the men heard was a small rock that rolled down the hill into the river. It made a splash. 
   	What was that noise? asked the first man. 
   	I don't know, said the other man.  Maybe it was just a little fish splashing in the water. 
   	The third noise the men heard was a rabbit running down the road.  
      Both men stopped walking and said, I think someone is following us.
      Just then the little raccoon came out of the woods and saw the men. He became afraid and climbed a tree.
      The men heard the raccoon moving in the tree and looked right at him. In the moonlight, all they could see was the mask of the raccoon. They thought it was another person who wanted to rob them.
        
		It is another masked bandit, said the first man. He must have a gun! 
		Don't shoot, said the other. you may take our cow and our pigs. 
		Take this bag of money, too, said the first man. ONLY PLEAE DON'T SHOOT. 
		As the men ran to their horses, one of them tossed a fat moneybag to the ground. The men went off down the road as fast as their horses could go. The cow and the pigs went back to Mrs. McGinnis' house.   

	After the men left, the raccoon felt it was safe and climbed down from the tree. Then he saw something in his path. It was the moneybag. The raccoon picked up the moneybag and went back to Mrs. McGinnis' house to look for more food.
	When the raccoon got to Mrs. McGinnis' house, he dropped the moneybag and looked for bread. There was nothing on the step, so he went up the tree to his bed.

      In the morning Mrs. McGinnis came outside and saw something on her step.
	What is this? It is a moneybag!
	She picked up the bag and looked inside. 
   	There is enough money here to build a barn for my cow and pigs. Now my wish can come true Now I can have a barn for my cow and my pigs.
   	With the money Mrs. McGinnis paid some men to build a barn. Before long the men finished their work and Mrs. McGinnis had her barn.

	At night, Mrs. McGinnis would often lean against the apple tree, look up at the stars, and say. My cow and pigs are safe in the barn, and ALL because I wished upon a star. That is the way she thought she got the money to build the barn!



