	A little raccoon who was almost tame lived in an old apple tree. He had a black mask on his face and six black rings on his tail.
      There, in the woods by the old apple tree, was a little house where Mrs. McGinnis lived.

	Mrs. McGinnis had one cow and two pigs.
She took armloads of hay to the cow and pails of corn to the pigs.
And every night the cow and the pigs went to sleep under the apple tree. 
		Then she put a slice of bread on the doorstep for the raccoon, and the raccoon knew that the bread was for him.
		One night she was standing in front of her house, as she often did. She looked up and saw a star.
		That's the first star I have seen tonight, indeed it is, she said. 			I will make a wish. Indeed I will. She looked up at the star.
	I wish for a little barn, so my cow and my pigs will be safe from he wind and the rain.  Then she put a slice of bread on her step.
	After Mrs. McGinnis had gone to bed, the raccoon came down from the tree and picked up the bread. 
	He walked into the woods until he came to a river. Beside the river he swished the bread in the water, because that is what a raccoon often does.
	When the bread was wet, he ate it.
   	Because he was still hungry, he started to look for something more to eat. Just as he started to look, he heard something coming down the road. Two men came along on their horses. The raccoon hid in back of a tree.
	The men got down from their horses. 
 	Mrs. McGinnis is not far from here," the first man said. We will leave our horses here, and we will go to Mrs. McGinnis's house. We will go very quietly, and we will take her cow and pigs. She will not know they are gone until morning."

	The men put black masks over their faces and started down the road. The raccoon followed. The men made no noise. When they reached the apple tree, they took the cow and the pigs and started back through the woods.
	The little raccoon still followed.
		He followed quietly. Then he stepped on a small branch, and the branch broke with a CRACK. 
		"What was that?" asked the first man.
		"It was nothing," said the other.
		Little night animals often play here. 

		Then a small rock rolled down the hill and into the river. It made a splash. 
		What was that? as ked the first man. 
		It was nothing, said the other. Nothing at all. 
Often little fish jump and splash in the water. Everything was very still until a rabbit ran down the road. 
		I think someone is following us, the first man said. 
		The little raccoon thought he would climb a tree because there he would be safe from danger. He climbed up and looked around the tree to see where the men were.   
		In the moonlight, only the black mask of the little raccoon could be seen. 
		THE MEN WERE LOOKING RIGHT AT HIM. 

 	It is another masked bandit, said the first man.
	Don't shoot. said the other.
	You may take our cow and our pigs.
	Take our money too, said the first man.
      ONLY PLEASE DON'T SHOOT. And as he ran to his horse, he tossed a fat moneybag to the ground. The men went off down the road as fast as their horses could go.
	The raccoon climbed down and picked up the moneybag. He took it to the river and swished it in the water.
      	The cow and the pigs started down the road that led to the little house, and the raccoon followed with the moneybag.
     Because he often looked on the step for bread, he went there to look. There was nothing on the step, so he dropped the moneybag and went up the tree to his bed.
     
      In the morning Mrs. McGinnis came outside. 
     What is this? It is a moneybag! Indeed it is !
My wish has come true! Indeed it has!
NOW I can have a barn for my cow and my pigs."
    Some men came, and soon there was a barn where no barn had been before.
		
     At night, Mrs. McGinnis would often lean against the apple tree, look up at the stars, and say, "My cow and my pigs are safe in the barn, and ALL because I wished upon a star." That is what she thought! 
     Then she would put something on her step.
	And after a while the little raccoon, who was almost tame, would climb down from the tree. Then he would look on the step because he knew that she had put a slice of bread there, just for him.











